Haiver â € | 00:00
Hi, everyone. Man, it's so good to see your faces again. We've had such a fun, intense week, I think, with our art history lecture on Tuesday. For those that haven't gotten to watch the session replay, Dr. Polina Rood did an incredible job deep diving into the history of a little of early photography, but mostly about the way that machines force us into ways of seeing and get us thinking about how we see not just art, but obviously the world and how we see the world through art made with machines. And that includes the incredible video art and installation art that our first her visiting artists in residence kevin and jen mccoy who are with us today are going to step through As always here at the beginning of the program, I think it's really important to outline the goals of why we are having visiting artists in the first place So visiting artists are a way for us to really get a sense of what it means to build a career in the arts, as well as to understand the breadth of what art is and what art can be. If we've been working in one discipline for a really long time, it's easy to be a little myopic, to really narrow our focus to just that one thing. And it becomes difficult sometimes to learn how to say things in art or through art other than in the ways that we've been doing so far. And there are many ways to move through the art world and many ways to be an artist.
So our visiting artists come in part to expand our horizons. They help us, I find, to map out a roadmap in some ways of what it means to build a career in the arts. That I find when I tune into podcasts and spaces and listen to artists talk about their practice, sometimes we only get the most recent projects. And the really great joy I find of having artists come into a classroom setting in programs like Artist Commons or in an MFA is you really get to see the arc of a series of projects from where they started to where they ended up, how one idea led to the next or how one opportunity introduce them to a curator or a collector or a gallerist that opened the door to do the next thing. And that series of steps, I think being able to see that, being able to see that almost like a roadmap, I said, enables us to envision what it means for ourselves to build a career in the arts and to string one project into the next and to start to find themes that resonate with us and different ways of exploring it across different bodies of work. And so I have found in my own practice that seeing that roadmap gives me the hubris to believe that I can do the same and almost like I have blinders on. And so in that moment of belief, it gives me the confidence, whether it's true confidence or false confidence, it doesn't matter. It gets me as an artist into motion to believe.
Like set, you know, to take the action, the steps that I need to move forward as an artist. So I hope that as our first pair of visiting artists comes in, you start to get a sense of how from their practice, both here are cool and interesting works of art, and here are cool and interesting artists doing exciting things in the art world that are important and meaningful. That just is scratching an itch of curiosity, but I hope that out of that you start to see how you can continue to expand what you're doing with your art. And as we start to get into goal setting in the coming weeks through our one-on-one sessions and our cohort feedback sessions, that you will start to think about how your work fits into similar pathways or not.
So thank you again to Dan and Kevin McCoy for being here. I'm going to turn this over to them. They have a great slideshow of work set up for us today in which to Step us through. Thank you again for being here, guys.
Speaker 2 | 04:03
Yeah, thanks, Tabor. And this is such a great opportunity to meet all of you.
So, and you'll see through our practice, we've been very enamored of, you know, artists taking kind of the means of production from various industries and taking them into their own hands. And I think this Artist Commons idea is really, you know, a kind of great step with that.
You know, Kevin and I both teach in MFA programs and, you know, work with artists. Mentees and students, you know, of all different ilks. And this kind of thing is super exciting.
So it's great that you guys have all joined this.
Jenn McCoy | 04:40
Yeah, and just to, you know, kind of start off in terms of background, you know, we have a collaborative practice, you know, so all of our work that circulates, you know, professionally and out in the world is co-authored, you know, as Jennifer and Kevin McCoy. And that was a decision we made early on coming out of art school. That we were working in related ways in kind of creative media arts in the broadest sense. This was a long time ago. This was in the 90s. But we didn't really want to compete with one another for opportunities and whatever. And we were already helping each other out on projects. And we wanted to, we were a couple at the time, and we were interested in breaking down that division between art and life, you know, living and art making, you know, how can you bring those closer together and not have, and what we saw, I don't know if it's artificial, I'll use that word, but, you know, an artificial distinction between this kind of art making and living, and this idea of being in a relationship and doing a collaborative practice, was a strategy that we, you know, leaned into early on and just kind of started it that way. And now many years later, it continues to go.
So it's been successful. So it's funny, you know, in the same sense that you only have one life to live, it's like we only have one professional career to look at, you know, and ours is this third way, this hybrid way, you know, and so the work that you're going to see today is all produced jointly. And it's not, the key to this kind of collaboration is committing to producing some third body of work that is not what you might have made on your own. And it's not what Jen might have made on her own. It's this other thing, you know, and you really have to we've really committed to that. And it's been super rewarding. And so people often ask us, do you do your own stuff and whatever? And what happens in practice is that, of course, we are our own people. We have our own ideas. We talk about things, whatever. We have our own kind of weird trips and whatever that we're on. But they always just kind of loop back around. The other person gets kind of excited about it or interested and it gets kind of brought in.
And then in the end, it kind of goes. So it's not a static kind of thing or some sort of like bureaucratic meeting oriented kind of thing. It's just this ongoing open-ended conversation that keeps on going. And just to pick up on a couple of things that Haber said about you know, this community, and we're obviously just stepping in here for the first time. But, you know, we've been educators for a long time.
You know, my focus with that really is you know, I encourage you to like think of this as a practice in the sense of in the same way that term is used in meditation or athletics or what have you know, it's like it's this ongoing effort to engage and improve and to increase your capacities, your sensitivities, your wherewithal, you know, and the goal is to The art making process, in my mind, is an end in itself. It's like the professionalization and the market and opportunities and all that kind of stuff is real. I don't want to say it's not important. It's totally there. But it is absolutely 100% downstream of the initial ongoing just desire and engagement with your own work. And commitment to your own ideas and to developing those ideas, you know, over time in a consistent way, you know?
So that's what you'll see here, you know? And the other thing with these kind of like slide presentation is it's like, it's a bit of a...
Yeah, we've done this a lot. And it's kind of funny, right? Because we tell this little narrative and it all sort of makes sense or whatever. It's like, of course we did this and we did that, then we did this or whatever. But that completely glosses over the fact that at each moment you're like, what are we doing? Is this even any good? Should we do, what are we going to do next? Does that make sense at all?
Like whatever, you know, so you just, you know, kind of after the fact, summing it up and putting it all together into this kind of package does disservice to the, you know, lived realities of art making, which is 99% uncertainty.
Speaker 2 | 09:10
Yeah, all the projects that didn't make it into the presentation would be another interesting presentation. - - Yeah, and that's why I ended up using, this is a music video we did last year was this for a song called "The Snake and Its Tail." And I thought that was really great because it's, you know, there's a lot of looping in our projects, but more often it's, you know, or the other reference was just that, you know, often the technology gives you ideas, you make the project and then that project gives you ideas for other technology or other, you know, kinds of approaches.
Jenn McCoy | 09:15
Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2 | 09:46
So, you know, there's a lot of like you know, circular, you know, kind of spiraling conversations, you know, what happens at a dinner conversation ends up as a, you know, as a research project and it may or may not end up in a project. Sometimes that project is the, you know, following the sort of, you know, question about the tools or the, you know, or the question. And often, you know, it can be years later.
So you'll see like throughout a bunch of projects, things really, you know, come forward and backward and recede and come forward again in terms of what's happening in the culture, what's happening in the studio. So we decided, to kind of go way back in time to sort of start out the presentation. And this was such an interesting project because this one comes sort of straight out of semiotic film theory. We had been studying in France and, you know, we were reading about all these, you know, theorists who were trying to think about, like, what are the building blocks of a story? What are the building blocks of narrative? How does language describe, you know, a situation? And so we're like, well, you know. ".
Jenn McCoy | 11:17
Of this kind of vague concept that you know, took a long time to come to fruition. But the key idea, the moment of like, wouldn't that be kind of weird? What would that be? What would this look like? The idea was, How could you take these stories, television, you know, narrative. Think about it as essentially as a kind of database. And so, you know, we think, so it's like this, and this was, you know, from a long time ago, 2001, it was this early kind of moment, you know, pre, internet's kind of barely there, whatever. This is way before YouTube.
You know, there was this, but you could feel this transition in the air from a narrative-based reality, story-based reality to something more data-driven, you know, more, you know, database-like, algorithmic-like, you know? And so we had this thought, had this idea that what if we were able to take television programs and turn them into databases? What would that mean? And what would that look like? And so the.
Speaker 2 | 12:21
Form- as artists, a kind of like weird rupture that we still see today between the digital or virtual and the physical. So the question sculpturally was like, okay, well, How much space does that take up, like on a wall?
So the idea was here that we did this project where we made a database of every shot from the first season of Starsky and Hutch, which was at even that time like a show that had faded into distant memory. And so using film theory categories, you know, we broke it down.
So it turns out that it takes up about, you know, 11 feet of gallery wall to have these discs, you know, across. Sometimes they're shown more in library mode, sometimes across the whole thing. But we... We sort of unedited the show and re-edited the show using some custom software that Kevin made us to kind of like, you know, kind of randomly put a bunch of clips back into order.
And then we, you know, pressed all of those onto, at this point, video CD, but then the ones that are in collections are DVDs. And then finally, in the museum context, the museums that have this in their collection have, I think hilariously, like redigitized everything and now they're digital files again.
So it just went in this another sort of crazy loop where, you know, the whole plan of the project was to rest it out of electronic world and put it into physical world. And now it's shown in physical world with digital world like hidden behind the scenes, which, you know, has its own kind of irony.
Jenn McCoy | 14:10
You know, yeah, but you know, so like the basic experience of looking at this piece is this little portable display kit like we saw in the previous thing and the, and these, this shelf of discs. And so the, with these very generic labels, you know, so like every stairway, you know, as you see here, every shop owner, every disguise, and were you to take that disc out and put it in the play? Wait, I have a video, Kevin. You do? Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2 | 14:37
So this would be like every exterior close-up.
Jenn McCoy | 14:42
Extreme close-up. Extreme close-up. Can't Seems like it.
Speaker 2 | 14:45
Read. Okay, and is this the video? Hold on.
Yeah, I don't know.
Jenn McCoy | 14:53
Click.
Speaker 2 | 14:54
Click somewhere.
Jenn McCoy | 14:58
I think if you click on that. There we go.
It's minutes to get down there and get back up here.
Speaker 2 | 16:20
Okay, cool. Let me get.
Jenn McCoy | 16:21
- Here? So, you know, you can see from that shelf, there's 278 different discs. And the experience when we made this and showed this was, you know, a kind of almost like a classic used record store kind of experience where you could take this thing and have this like viewing listening stations. This little kit that we made was in the years before this, in the late 90s, we were doing a lot of live VJ kind of work and working with these different DJs and these you know, club environments and doing these live mixes and stuff. And we have, you know, we had to lug this mountain of gear around all this like old CRT displays, these big old computers, this big video mixer, all this like crap we're like schlepping around. And the DJs had like these cool little kits, like their records and their kind of cool little boxes, like whatever. And so this little suitcase viewer thing was a sort of homage to sleek playback that we did not have when we were doing VJ stuff. But, yeah, it was.
Speaker 2 | 17:23
Kind of the idea of like, you know, sculpture as appliance, like, you know, computers are such like multi purpose things like what if this little get up this little sculptural piece did like one thing and it was to play these discs and You know the and I think you know, in terms of like our process, it was really about setting up rules, you know, like we didn't edit this material at all, every time the original editor like made a choice with that was our edit point, so you know some of the cuts are like. You know, two minutes long.
Like every ominous music is just like all of these long panning shots and you're supposed to listen direct, you know, you were directing you to the audio, but then the video is just stuck to it. And so same with like extreme closeup, they tend to be really short shots. And so that disc can be really short.
So, you know, it's very interesting, you know, how artists make themselves rules. And sometimes those are visible to the viewer. And sometimes it's just an internal strategy to kind of keep the project moving and keep it defined.
Jenn McCoy | 18:28
And this happened, this project, it was so labor intensive, extremely labor intensive. And it was an early lesson of something that has happened a lot in our work where you have an idea and you map out some sort of production process that often is pretty elaborate. Right. And you can't really even assess the quality, you know, does the idea work, right? Does it work? And you have to go all the way through it. You've got to do the whole thing until it's basically done. And all the pieces are doing what they're supposed to do there. Everything's brought together. Then you can step back and kind of go. Did the idea work? And so that's happened a lot in our work. And you just have to get comfortable with that, taking the risk of-- it's not just sort of like the risk of a blank piece of paper or something that you've got to put a sketch on or something. It's like, no, committing to this elaborate production process, getting to the end of it, and only then can you really decide Yes or no? And just one other thing on that piece. It's funny because that was done 25 years ago and it was, in many ways, the world's caught up to those ideas and that style of editing of an edit that is all of one type of thing. We did this project and a number of other projects that got a lot of traction at the time.
And then there was another artist that was doing related things, Christian Marclay. And that style of editing now is known as supercuts. And so that project and other ones that we did and he did are kind of often looked at as sort of the start of this Supercuts project. Form, which is kind of fun.
Speaker 2 | 20:08
Yeah. And then going down that, you know, driveway, like towards like thinking about like the police procedural and taking apart When we showed that piece and others like it, we did one about Star Trek, you know, and we did one about the show Kung Fu, and that one was called What I Learned. And the idea was, you know, what would you know about the world if all you had watched was this one television show? And so, you know, we broke it up into quadrants. What I learned about capitalism, what I learned about filmmaking, what I learned about nature and society. And, you know, people would ask, like, you've, you know, you've taken these genres apart, you've reassembled them, you've seen thousands of clips, you've created these like archives or libraries for others to do that.
Like, what can we take from this? Because, you know, at the time, and even now, there's lots of people doing kind of found footage projects where it's like, look at the latent content. If you look at all of this, you will see that, you know, people hate women or, you know, whatever they're going to, you know, say. And so we were like, well, that's interesting.
Like, what is the building block? Like, what could we do to think about these, you know, basic kinds of, you know, boiling down a to like one, you know, one essential yeah and like Godard you know always said Jean-Luc Godard film is a girl plus a gun like that's it like you just need these two trajectories in a film and you've got a movie so we I think we sent you guys this project horror chase and the idea was like okay let's think about the database not in a you know and not in a you know, paradigmatic way where it's like, okay, here's this one, you know, shot that is everything.
Jenn McCoy | 21:28
Type of? Essential one.
Speaker 2 | 22:00
But like, what if we look at it in a syntagmatic way? Like, what if we think about every single take that goes into one shot?
So we appropriated, One shot from Evil Dead 2, which was a Sam Raimi film. Kevin knew this actor he had gone to undergrad with who kind of looked like the main character.
So we cast him and we ended up building this entire set in about a 900 square foot space. Soundstage. And the idea was that we would shoot all of these different takes.
And then we essentially made like a flipbook versions of all of the different film takes. And the computer could decide which take to play, what direction to play it in forwards or backwards. And how fast At what speed?
Jenn McCoy | 22:52
At what speed.
Speaker 2 | 22:54
And so the idea here was like, okay, here's like, we're diving deep into this one shot, which is this like, you know, the perfect shot for horror, like somebody is being chased. And then because of the way the performance and the algorithm works, sometimes, you know, the actor is coming at us and sometimes we're the assailant.
So it's this, you know, push and pull. And in terms of not knowing what it's going to do until it's done, we had to disassemble this entire set before the film came back from the lab. The whole thing was shot on Super 16 film, which we thought was like kind of just being like fetishistic because of course we could have done video. But considering the longevity of the piece and the fact that we've gone back to this, the film stock and kept, you know, re-scanning it at higher and higher resolutions. And now it's up to like this 4K scan. It is, I think, rule of thumb to try to future proof your work as much as possible and think about like okay what if we're watching 8k cinema in the future what does my piece look like and you know as artists you don't know where the world is going but we've tried to do what we can so here's a shot of it installed.
Jenn McCoy | 24:08
And you guys saw, Haber, you guys saw a clip from it in motion, right? The whole, or do we have one on this? I have one. Okay. There we go.
Speaker 2 | 24:17
All right, I think I have to click.
Jenn McCoy | 24:20
You just click on it.
Speaker 2 | 24:37
And the idea of sort of endlessness is important. And that the machine, the computer's doing something live, that it never looks the same twice. It's been so great as the artist to like walk into the gallery and you're like, I didn't know it could do that.
So, you know, there's a kind.
Jenn McCoy | 24:55
Of... So, you know, so what you're seeing there is essentially a live real-time edited, you know, film from, you know, kind of from source materials and, you know, some things to look at in that clip.
I mean, you guys have seen it a lot, but I mean, you don't have to go back to it, but we use different lenses on that camera. So sometimes it's a wider lens.
You see more off the top of the set. You see it.
So it's more set like you can see the grid of the black box above it on some of the takes. Sometimes it's a tighter lens.
So you're kind of closer in this performance changes. Sometimes it's a little bit more comic.
Sometimes it's a little bit more scared. And then this kind of like back and forth thing. And, you know, when you're seeing it in a proper installation and not on a, you know, little funky little zoom window you know it's it has a real impact right it's big it's a big image that sound that big rumbly sound has a real physical presence to it and there's an endlessness to it when you sit and watch it that you know you're it's this hermetically sealed world that in you know in some ways is bigger on the inside than it is on the outside in a way and It's really interesting, this piece. We did it, the software that we had available back in the day when we first did it barely got it to work. Over the years, it's been a very popular piece. It showed in a number of different contexts. We've reauthored it four times in the 25 years of it in terms of the underlying code. And that really brings up an interesting question of like, you know, with digitally native work or software native work, you know, it's like, is it about the... Moment of its made and the kind of technological aesthetics of that given frame. And we could think about like kind of low poly or eight bit kind of stuff or whatever, you know, now where it's like, you know, eight bit low poly is like a design choice.
You know, it comes from historical limitations, but now it's like a factor, a function of aesthetic decision-making. And so with this, you know, to get it to work, to do that live editing back in, 2002, it's like we had to shrink that beautiful film frame down to just this little postage stamp to get it to play like that. And so the main thing that we've done over the years in terms of reauthoring it is keeping the basic editing decision the same, you know, so the underlying logic, the probabilities, the kind of picking of stuff, and of course the original you know, shots, the original subject matter, all that has stayed the same, but it's just allowed us to increase the resolution basically over time. And so it went from like a 320 by 240 pixel, tiny little thing. It went to like a 640 by 480. It went to like a 720 HD kind of frame, 1080 HD frame.
And then now in its latest version that we just did last year, You know, we went back to the original 16 millimeter film, had it laser scanned, 4K, and it looks just totally amazing. So now we have this 4K version and it's like, you know, you're seeing the piece for the first time again.
You know, it's for me, you know, seeing it because it just looks so amazing. Good now. It's like amazing to see it just kind of like flow fluid, you know, at 4k real-time 4k scale. It's like, your head is up to your thinking.
Speaker 2 | 28:12
You just have to live long enough that the technology in keep.
Jenn McCoy | 28:18
Just going. And then like the underlying code change, you know, we wrote it originally in, something called director, macro media director, which was a precursor to flash, which, you know, maybe you know about.
And then we did a version of it in this really obscure, Apple-based language. Called Quartz Composer. Then we did a version of it in Python. And this piece just last year got acquired by the Whitney Museum of American Art and into their permanent collection. And so for that version, it's like going into the Whitney, you know, it's like, you know, it's going to be good. And so I made a native Mac OS version of it, you know, so I'm running on Mac hardware. Embedded into that suitcase. And so it plays great. And so that idea of just this kind of progression and deciding what's important versus what is, not that it's not important, but what's essential versus what's malleable, what's fixed versus what can change in a work over time is something that is, you know, it's like, again, we're old. We've been doing this a long time and we've been in a position now to engage with those questions. And they're very interesting questions. They're not always easy to figure.
Speaker 2 | 29:33
Out. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, well so you know after we did the horror chase and we did another one called the kiss which is similar structure but just with one kiss lifted from the postman always rings twice, and that one we shot on 35 millimeter which was. Awesome to work with. It's somehow cheap to make film if you're just doing two minutes.
Jenn McCoy | 29:58
One whole.
Speaker 2 | 29:59
Yeah. Just go for it. But you know the question that I kept thinking about at the time and there were a lot of artists thinking about film and you know slicing and dicing it kind of appropriating it considering it.
You know we were in this big show called Cut: Film as Found Objects with I think Doug Gordon was in it and Candice Bright's and Christian Markley and I think what kind of started to bother me is like okay well Film is important to many people. It's not important to everyone. Why?
Like, why is it important to us? Why is it important to me? Why do we keep thinking about this as a reference?
So these miniature projects were just an attempt to sort of you know, do the classic art school first day of school question, where are you in the work? You know? And so we literally just like popped tiny little versions of ourselves in front of these like epic moments in cinema that had inspired us and really tried to tease out the connection between like fan and art object and think about the kinds of, you know, viewing situations that create fans.
So if you look at this little image, you can see my cursor, right? So Kevin and I are here. There's Kevin and there's me. This is a spinning turntable on which We have recreated one shot from a film by Jean-Luc Godard called Weekend, and it's a car wreck. And so, you know, Kevin and I were just, I don't know, talking one day and he's like, you know, if you did the car wreck in a circle, it could be endless. And if you put the camera down low, it would just look endless.
Like it was going down the road, like panning down the road. And we were like man, how big would the sculpture have to be to do that? And it turns out about like three feet wide. And it allowed us- Four Yeah, four by five.
Jenn McCoy | 31:59
By five?
Speaker 2 | 32:00
I was so sad to tear down that set for Horror Chase because I think a concern in our studio is always like, This is so cool. We love looking at this. How do you give that experience of discovery in your studio over to the viewer?
You know, like usually like someone has like a, you know, if you're a painter, you've got a great discovery. Like, you know, maybe you title the work or you talk about it in the press or you put wall text that is like, this is the key. This is the punctum. This is the thing to look at. And we're just not content with that. We're like, let's try to build it and have a time-based experience of liveness happen. And so that's where these miniatures kind of came from.
So, My thoughts about this that I love to think about are just like the different kinds of time. So it's called Our Second Date because it literally was our second date, like ripped from biography.
Jenn McCoy | 32:57
We went to go see Jean-Luc Godard's weekend at a little movie theater. Yeah.
Speaker 2 | 33:01
The little shitty little cinemas in Paris where like people are asleep in the back and they've got like these like dusty red curtains. So we kind of built the cinema in miniature.
So you can see us here in close up. You see the cinema from an over the shoulder shot here. And there's software underneath that cuts together images from the various cameras.
So here's kind of a close up of the cameras that are specifically on the miniature scene. And, you know, very fun to just like go through a shot frame by frame and like create something in miniature that you're seeing in cinema and kind of backwards engineer that shot.
And then little innovations like let's make it a hillside so that the camera can't see like past this side onto the other side. And, you know, really think about creating this film in real time. I think I might have video. There's a very close up.
So you can kind of see like the blood on the highway and the overturned highway.
Jenn McCoy | 34:03
Car. I heard a crash on the.
Speaker 2 | 34:06
Exactly. And then the sound we just lifted straight from Godard, you know, so the idea was like new cut in the video, same sound. Let's see. *Buzzing*.
Jenn McCoy | 35:31
Exactly. Yeah, totally. My God. We've had so many annoying soundtracks that play endlessly in spaces. It's just like, yeah, you're welcome.
Speaker 2 | 35:39
Yeah, I just, yeah, we should just like publicly thank our gallerist who had to like buckle down and have these pieces going for six weeks at a time. She never, we never walked into the gallery and found it turned down, which I think is a testament.
Jenn McCoy | 35:55
I mean, the piece, it's a sculptural work. It's sculpture and video. It's sculpture and live video.
So you're coming into this. It's kinetic sculpture and live video.
So you're coming in and you're seeing this tabletop. It's got lights. It's got this big moving element. It's got these little models, whatever.
And then it's got this kind of weird conduit. Little mini cameras all over it.
And then in front of it, you've got this projection, this video projection. And as a viewer, you could slowly realize that the image that you're seeing on the projection is coming from the sculpture in front of you, and that it's a live image, that those cameras are live. And a billion people eventually come and try to wave their hands in front of the camera to go and see that it's like their hands on screen. They're like my God, it's a live image. And so what that documentation does a good job of showing all the kind of sculptural elements, but it's a little bit quick on showing the edit.
So, because the projection is an edit. So it cuts between those different views. And so there is a rhythm to it that you see as a viewer of like that shot, you know, and then the other trick with this is that there's two different narrative spaces in the piece. There's the space of the original Godard film of that, you know, traveling shot of the car crash.
And then there's the other story of Jen and I watching that film, right? And that's the second date part, right, in the theater. And so the film that you see on the screen is cutting between those two different distinct but related narrative worlds by, and there's a little thing, we have this little computer controlled video switcher thing bolted up underneath the table that's cutting through those different camera views. And, you know, so we had this idea of like, how do we make this live cinema? It's like, we could do it with miniatures and live cameras. And so it was, again, this gradual process of like thinking about all of the links in the chain that it would take to bring this idea into the world, into fruition. And it was really challenging, really hard to think of How do you begin? What are we talking about? What are the steps? And that's before you get to all the kind of technical problem solving. Just like, what is this? You're like, what is this?
And then you get all the way to the end and you're like, is this even art? What the fuck is this? It's just this weird ass thing. And I think our work, the project- What is this?
Speaker 2 | 38:25
Now, the projects of ours that have been most successful are the ones that people have been like, I don't really know that this is art, but let's just put it over in the gallery. This will be great. And yeah, I think that kind of like open space for thinking has been, you know, very helpful to us. But yeah, very hard to get started. The first miniature project we did, we had a bunch of projects. Pieces we were trying to make. And we had already gotten this grant to do this work. And we realized after we got the grant that even though we had made some miniatures and shot them and made a little film out of it, that we really didn't know exactly how to start. And it turned out that, you know, back to the drawing board, if you storyboard your idea of that storyboard is essentially what you're making in miniature, that there's nothing in between. You just build the storyboard sculpturally and then have cameras trained on all of it.
So what was fun in different projects is you're building things at different scales. So if you need a close-up of something, the miniature might be half an inch to a foot. But if you're doing a big wide shot, all of a sudden you replicate that same stuff, but in eighth inch scale.
So we just got really interested in like geeky little train shops across the internet to like just buy like skaters or like, you know, people with flowers and then, you know, whatever we couldn't find, we got really interested in like basically making illustrator files and then having this company in Georgia, like cut out everything like a kit, send it to New York and then we'd assemble it, like kind of design your own kit and then have it made and sent back. So Yeah, but my favorite word in the entire English language or collection of words is scale lumber.
Jenn McCoy | 40:10
Laser cutting was pretty, was harder to come by.
Speaker 2 | 40:19
Like it's so fun that you could buy like a two by four eighth inch scale and just like have like a bunch of sticks come in the mail. That would be like your entire like production list.
So yeah, we got very deep in production. I will move along. This project is from being deep in.
So I don't know who saw the miniature work or what they thought of it, but A few months after we showed one of them, we get this like crazy FedEx in the mail. I thought it was a bomb. It was this huge thing. And it was from a museum, the museum at Andover College, which has like an incredible collection of photography. They have like Robert Frank's entire American series. And they're like, okay, we're commissioning you.
Like there was no phone call. There was no email. We just get this thing in the mail, this huge catalog from their last couple of shows and a letter saying we're doing a show called Models as Muse. Our collection, M-U-S-E, our collection includes images a a whole bunch of model ships that are priceless and we keep in the basement and we are commissioning six different artists to think about miniatures and we were like my god what are we gonna do with this and of course you say yes because you're like i'm up for a challenge but like model ships like nautical history like what like how are we going to figure this out And so our strategy was to just sort of ask questions about what was possible. And it just seemed silly to recreate a priceless, meticulous model.
So we basically just had them bring it up from the basement. And they brought it up from the basement and we built a sculpture around it.
So this is this like basically just a stand and there's a it's a boat hall yeah and it was supposed to all slot together and be like very portable but once we actually built it we couldn't get it apart again so anyway it is what it is now But then the idea was, how can we animate this ship without moving this ship?
Jenn McCoy | 42:13
Like a boat it's like a boat hole like.
Speaker 2 | 42:31
Because there was no way they were going to let us put it on a track or anything like that. And so, you know, we were messing around in the studio and realized, you don't have to animate the ship. You just have to animate the camera. And so we built this like little wave track here and had that, you know, kind of laser cut and built.
And then we the camera's here and the light follows it. And then the projection, The tricky part is we didn't want wires, you know, like a train around a Christmas tree. You can't like wrap them all up.
So Kevin realized, we could do this with wireless video. And it was all shorty and weird, but we decided that actually made it look more like it was crashing.
So we kind of just went with that. And so this ship was called the Dreadnought and it actually did... Come meet its end in the bottom of the ocean.
So we just decided to visualize the last several minutes of that. I think we have video.
Jenn McCoy | 45:26
One of those things where you're like yeah, I see how it could work. We could, you know, put a belt around it and have a motor do the belt and make a track and the thing could pull it around.
Yeah, that'll be great. We'll make a wave cutout and the thing will go up and down the wave.
Yeah, it's going to be great. And then it was just like, it was totally insane.
Yeah, this is the pure top of my life. Those are big, yes, those are absolutely big capacitors, which was not part of the design. It was like, you know, Putting 12 volts onto those two copper rails and then having it get pulled up into the system. It's like, sounds great. Except there was all this endless micro dropout shit just kept turning off, turning on, like whatever. And so then it was just like, I guess just pour a bunch of capacitors into it. See if that smooths it out. I don't know if that was the best solution, but it got to work better.
I mean, now I guess you do it with batteries, you do recharge the batteries, something like that. This was a while ago and that didn't cross my mind so much. But yeah, so big giant capacitors on there to try to smooth out the power flow. It would fall off the tracks. The track would, because of the high current on the metal, on the copper rails, would attract all this dust out of the air.
So they would get like this weird black soot on there. You know, so just all of this crazy Just reality stuff would kind of come in, you know, the feed from the camera, like on and on. My God. But when it worked, it was just totally awesome. We're just like my God, it's so hilarious. It's so good. And the, you know, We were designing those cutouts, you know, and you saw it's like just this, it's this kind of flexible, you can notch, you put notches in kind of thin paneling and then you can make it bend, you know, so we like on the little table saw, like making these little notches and that metal and that wood piece to kind of then make it bend around the thing. And that's our cutout, you know, thing. And it turns out that, you know, we got the scale wrong and we just guessed wrong on the scale and like those mountain, those waves. Way high.
Speaker 2 | 47:28
Too.
Jenn McCoy | 47:30
- Huge compared to the boat model in the camera lens, it was just like my God, this thing is just like, - Comically pitching. You just go with it. It's like yeah, it's going to be great.
Yeah.
Speaker 2 | 47:45
Really fun show too. I really admire an exhibition where they like kind of like rock the theme. They had like, you know, Ninth graders in sweaters singing sea shanties at the opening. And it was kind of an amazing situation.
Jenn McCoy | 48:05
That was a fun piece. Yes. And again, another one of those weird ones where you make this thing, you know, this like sculpture plus video thing where it's like you have this split attention, you know, so it's like you look here, but you have to look there. And like, what is the artwork? The artwork is the totality of the viewing experience of the object and the image at the same time, you know, so it's weird. It's a weird thing. Zone. But we've done that a lot.
Speaker 2 | 48:32
Yeah. Yeah. And one other sort of form factor that the work has taken is we really wanted to try, you know, once the lights are part of the work and you think about like, okay, there's this like tripartite thing, there's the model, the light and the camera, what could we make with it?
So we had a commission from the British Film Institute when they created their new building in at the Hayward Gallery in over right on the Thames in central London. So for their opening, we wanted to do something that could kind of like occupy this massive space, but kind of have the viewers below it. And so there's four chandeliers that are all creating the film on the screen. And the innovation or sort of thing we wanted to do here is again, referring to Godard, this one kind of recreates some, not so much of the film, but like the look and feel of a film like "Alphaville." So even though the cameras are in color, the sets are in black and white.
So the image looks like it's in black and white, but then there's some color flares that can happen. And we wanted to think about how subtitles work, where if you're watching a film, the subtitle is like married to the image.
Like if you did a screen grab from a foreign film, there would be an image of something and the text. And so many of the models are just plexiglass laser cut text against images.
You know, against the image. And so this idea of like physicalizing something that happens on the screen, but make it into a three-dimensional shape was kind of part of what we were doing here. And so, you know, everything edits together from these four chandeliers into these, you know, evocative black and white ideas about, you know, I think this is, these pieces are most like overtly in, you know, reference to architecture. It's thinking about, you know, this sort of utopian city that this situationist architect, Constant, was envisioning.
So we worked a lot from his drawings of this like city. He had like rooms for crying and rooms for laughing and this idea of psychogeography.
So the idea of like creating these like evocative in black and white film stills and then having them edit together in this very like open-ended way like the edit you know never is the same twice we started to you know kind of riff on that idea and this piece traveled to a bunch of places in these giant crates and i think is maybe our largest work in terms of just square footage yeah anything else you want to talk about this one kevin.
Jenn McCoy | 51:20
You know, we got tired of making kinetic stuff because stuff always breaks. So then we thought let's do stuff on the ceiling instead. And it's like, that's not any easier. That just has its own substitute one set of headaches for another set of headaches. But yeah, It was beautiful when it worked, when it all came together. It's like, yeah.
Speaker 2 | 51:38
Well, Kevin, I will leave you to the next project because it's kind of your avenue of research into blockchain. It's funny to think about how this all leads to like thinking about blockchains. But in my sort of like, you know, first row seat, I will say that like, you know, we for many years showed at this gallery that just recently the gallerist retired, but postmasters and many artists were thinking about, you know, physicalizing ideas about tools that were happening in the world of either video or computers, you know, trying to use the gallery as a site for investigation. But because it's a commercial gallery, this idea of like, well, how are people compensated for this? And so you have artists like Raphael Rosendahl, who like early days was like, I know, I will sell the URL to this website. Other people like us making sculpture and having onboard software that was artists' written, you know, artist driven. And so, you know, when people started talking about Bitcoin, you know, Kevin was like, super interested in like thinking about if and how this could be applicable to art.
So this project's from 2014. But when did you start really thinking about that more like 2012?
Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 53:06
Yeah. But let me just say, I wanted to pick up on one comment that I saw pop up on the thing about, you know, these earlier pieces, big, you know, sculptural kind of complicated things and the question of do we have to travel with our work to do the setup versus other people or support in that department. And that's been really interesting to see over the years. And we certainly have done a lot of traveling and a lot of setup, but in the gallery world and in the museum world, this isn't always the case, but when you get, you know, like a museum or whatever, it's like people are really skilled, you know? And so we've been pleasantly surprised at how people are able to do that. People have been able to install these pieces where we didn't have to do every damn thing ourselves. And, you know, people can do it. And so, like in the case of Constant World, there was a whole, you know, the British Film Institute commissioned it. And we were there in London doing the whole install. That was a whole thing. But, you know, as part of their mandate, it toured to like six different places all around the U.K., And we were not, we didn't go to any of those places, I don't think. And, you know, so they had something that kind of took it down and they figured it out, you know, they did it. And, you know, we, of course, in the process of fabrication, you're always thinking about how it's going to get installed or, you know, how it's, you know, how the piece is going to come together and, you know, all the kind of componentry of it.
You know, so you bring some care and attention to those questions of install and de-install as well as the questions of creating. The science of creating, art creating is just a thing to behold. It's kind of amazing.
You know, the people that are like crate builders, you're just like, wow, that is so cool. Very cool. And so, you know, in many cases that boat, you know, the high seas you know, went to different, has had an ongoing life in different ways and constant world, all that stuff, you know, our second date is in the collection at MoMA. They've done all kinds of stuff with it. And, you know, so it's, you know, Luckily, you know, it doesn't always, you know, when you can find that, when you get to that moment, you find those people that can really bring the right kind of care and attention and skill to you. They're out there, they exist, and then you don't have to do everything yourself. And, you know, you just have to, you know, kind of support that process.
Well.
Speaker 2 | 55:36
And there's more and more of them because now, you know, it used to be like there was like one person who could fix Nam June Pike's work and she was it. But now there's actual whole college programs devoted to conservation of digital media. And so, you know, I just did a talk in Houston with the person at the Menil Foundation and I mean, her knowledge is like vast, like, you know, just incredible people that are now, you know, making this, you know, a whole niche of, you know, art conservation.
So I can only think it's going to get better. And, you know, people will probably have even more efficient ways to answer these questions about conservation and preservation.
Jenn McCoy | 56:21
I mean, just, you know, case in point, the very first piece we showed, every shot, every episode, you know, it's just funky, you know, disc player and this little screen, this collection of, you know, not even DVDs, it was video CDs. You know, you couldn't make DVDs even back then.
So it's this weird, just... Just crazy thing. And it's in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum here in New York. And they have just, it's incredible over the years and they got it 25 years ago and they have done so much work on not just maintenance in a kind of like maintenance sense, but just in just, you know, just keeping this piece going, just thinking about it from an archival and archivists standpoint, They did a whole big workshop on it when they'd had it in collection for 10 years. They just did this whole big thing on it like three or four years ago, just kind of just keeping it going. And over the years, we've been able to kind of, they always talk with us about it, check in with us, and we're involved in the process, but we're not, we don't have to do it. And we let them kind of make decisions that are in keeping with professional practices around those things, you know? And so it's just sort of like, it's just been really, again, one of the benefits of being old and not stopping and just keeping going is that you get to encounter these things that only play out over time, you know, and that we're not aware of, you know, in a short time frame. And that's been really rewarding. And so that question of, you know, archiving, conserving, and ongoing installation and, you know, install of artworks, you know, it's good news. Ultimately, it's good news. And so the quantum, yeah, so yeah, I was really, so it's, you know, it's this funny story.
So I learned about Bitcoin in 2010 and heard about it and was just sort of like, whatever, I don't know what this is, you know, we're digital artists. We like to think of, you know, pay attention to all this kind of like weird shit that's happening, right?
So, Bitcoin was no exception to that. But then for whatever reason, back in 2012, I got more into it again and heard about it again. It's like, let's check it out.
And then in 2013, I was really obsessed with it. Really just like, what is this? This is reading the Bitcoin white paper, just the whole rabbit hole journey of this weird technology. And the slow realization that even though it was open source software, and even though all the records involved with it are publicly available and there, everything is transparent, everything is available, there was still this real way, actual way, in which some form of digitally native uniqueness had been created with that. And so these Bitcoin tokens were created natively digital and natively unique in the sense that I had mine, you had yours. If I gave you mine, I didn't have mine anymore. And now you had them. And that to me, once I kind of got my head around that was just so bizarre, you know, because it's like, we're, you know, digital people, we're internet people. We're like, you know, emailing, here's an image. And it's like, now I have the image. Now you have the image and it's on the website. Everyone can look at it. All that kind of stuff, right. Of just, copy paste. But then here was this thing, this distributed network that no one was in charge of, that there was no leader of, no one was like the central authority keeping track of all this stuff. It was an ad hoc network that created this form of digital uniqueness. And I thought that was really just kind of insane, pretty amazing. And so in 2013, once I was kind of put all those pieces together in my mind, it was like, well, so they did this for these tokens that have a kind of money-like property. Could you do the same thing for a piece of digital art? Could you do this for a file? Could you make a file that, digitally unique and digitally uniquely transferable from one person to the other, you know? And so that was, what That was kind of my question myself.
You know, like, how is that possible? I knew it was possible because it had been done with this money token.
So it's like, how do we transfer those same properties to a slightly different thing, a broader thing of a digital image, a digital artwork that would create uniqueness around a natively digital artwork and could open up new possibilities for people? For people, for artists and for, you know, certainly in a market sense, but just kind of creatively, conceptually, but mostly it was just be like, what would that thing be? It's like, what is it? What is it? What is it? What would it look like?
You know? And so, It was this weird open question that I was just thinking about a lot in 2013 and in 2014. And I was invited to present these ideas here in New York at a place called the New Museum, just down the block from where I'm at right now, at a conference. And I was paired up. This is sponsored by the digital art organization Rhizome, which is a great place if you don't know them, and they've been around for a long time and still going strong, and we've been working with them for a long time. And so in that context of this presentation at the New Museum talking about how this new technology known as the blockchain, how artists could, you know, work with it, I put these ideas together into a concrete form. And so what Quantum is, it's an animated GIF file. The frames from it come from a piece of processing code that I wrote, kind of like a sketch. That I'd written before, you know, so its original state was a real-time, like a, I mean, P5JS, it's not, wasn't P5JS, but the predecessor to P5JS, it's called Processing, it works on Java, and it was this animation, and so it, but the, you know, Quantum's claim to fame, there's some of the images from it, some of the frames, its claim to fame is that it's the first digital artwork with this trans, you know, with this blockchain record that makes it unique and uniquely transferable.
So it, you know, even though these terms didn't exist at the time, we had different, we were making up terms trying to describe what we were talking about. It is considered to be the first NFT because of this relationship that it has between blockchain and blockchain record and a digital artwork, a digital file. And so, At the New Museum, my partner and I, Anil Dash, presented this idea, presented a simple tool that could allow people to create these on-chain records. And we showed, and I created several different examples of it. The very first one of it was this one, Quantum. And so it's considered by folks to be the first NFT and the start of the NFT era. Of course, our technology and the story is kind of... Came and went, and I spent 2015, 2016 trying to develop it. We made a whole platform called Monograph. That allowed people to put works on chain and to buy and sell them. This is before Ethereum, you know, was really going. Ethereum is just kind of getting going at the end of our process.
So, you know, it obviously our approach was not the approach that one and the idea took a lot more, you know, a number more years before it really all the different pieces came together and it became a more viable concept in the kind of post crypto punks kind of era. But yeah, but this work, "Quantum," is significant in that way. And it's funny, like in this scale of our work, I don't know, do you have an animation of it playing this thing or is it just these images? No. Okay. You can find it, whatever.
I mean, it's cool. It's beautiful. It's just like beautiful little kind of undulating thing. But it's not totally, you know, super connected to our... Style of our work, you know, this sort of like, you know, geometric abstraction is not always where we're coming from. It does have a kind of mystical vibe that I think is kind of going on in some aspects of our work, you know, so it's sort of that, you know, in that regard. But the key insight in terms of like you know making this an actual thing was that the block the uniqueness comes from the blockchain record part of it and it's not really associated to the artwork itself you're creating this you create a parallel system and so you have the digital thing and then you have you know the animate you know the file or whatever and then you've got this record that lives on this distributed ledger. And that's the unique part, that distributed ledger record is the unique part.
And then it's just about how do you associate those two things together? How do you link them together, these two things that are essentially disparate? And in that sense, that's related to our work in a really direct way, right? Because it's like so much of our work is this kind of two-sided thing where you're showing something and then showing it again in this different way and asking the viewer to navigate between those two things. If it's the miniatures and the live cameras to the screen, if it's the fixed boat, but then it's got this other thing kind of moving in relationship to it, you know?
So it's this kind of relationship of some kind of A plus some kind of B you know, together, this A plus B. And so that was the-.
Speaker 2 | 01:06:21
Well this literal graphic- Well, this actual, you know, animation was actually part of another miniature piece, too. So, you know, I think practically Kevin's like, what kind of artwork makes sense to, like, do this with? And there was this animation on our hard drive because it had been... In this miniature project that had this like Island and glass gun and was showing it from different. And this would, it would look like, you know, it was on like a three by four inch screen embedded in another project.
So, you know, it's kind of great that he didn't pick like, you know, a Bitcoin, you know, logo or a scan of, you know, some scan from a Xerox copy or like, you know, it was something that came from within our practice. But it is funny because, you know, people are like, do some more geographic, geometric abstraction. We're like, yeah, I don't do that. But.
Jenn McCoy | 01:07:12
You know, it was certainly this really crazy odyssey of trying to, you know, In 2015, trying to explain this idea of like, hey, there's distributed ledger technologies there and digital artists could use it to make their artworks unique and you can create a market around that or whatever. In 2016, whatever, nobody understood what the fuck I was talking about at all. It was just like, okay. What? No, thanks.
You know, there was nothing. It was very sobering to see what, you know, kind of being too early means in practice. It just means you're screwed.
You know, it's just like, you can, you know, it's just ain't going to happen, man. It's not going to happen. And indeed it did not happen.
Speaker 2 | 01:07:55
Well, I mean, it did in a different way. And then we had to contend with, you know, thousands of people being like, wait, NFTs, isn't that what you were talking about?
Like five years ago?
You can totally imagine like how someone like Lindsay Lohan feels. I don't know.
Jenn McCoy | 01:08:40
I mean, I'm using it as a prop for my laptop here, but the, you know, the huge Tosh and, you know, on NFTs book, you know, which is my laptop stand and like there, you know, there's the contract address of the quantum is this hash or is there it is, you know, so it's, yeah. You know, it eventually it's, you know, importance, you know, the reality of what was created eventually was kind of recognized and seen. And obviously the community that eventually came together and whatever is vastly larger than any, you know, kind of single community kind of origin story and it relied on all kinds of different things happening. And of course the idea seems to have crashed into the waves of reality, you know, but I do think that this notion of digital unique digital ownership that NFTs represent and of course Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies before that. But I bet I think NFTs are uniquely special in this regard because they're cultural objects, not just financial objects. I think that this idea of uniquely ownable digital property is too important of an idea to ever go away.
So I think NFTs in some way, shape or form are going to be here to stay. Yeah. Yeah.
So it was Quantum. Quantum was sold.
So eventually there's my God, there's so much drama and backstory around Quantum and, you know, it's just an ongoing to this day, whatever. There's a collector. It's a private collector. To answer your question, Quantum is in a private collection. A guy in England owns it.
So it is not in an institutional collection. Which was a decision I made that For better or worse. But yeah, maybe he'll donate it to a museum. That seems to be what a lot of NFT collectors seem to be doing.
So maybe someday he'll donate it, which would be cool. That would be nice.
Speaker 2 | 01:10:40
That's kind of how museums work with any piece of art, honestly, is some private collector kind of either buys it for the museum or is on their board. So it's very close to the same process.
Jenn McCoy | 01:10:52
Yeah. Yeah. And so, you know, we, and, you know, so this moment of NFTs and, you know, my really kind of trying to develop this idea was kind of in the mid, you know, teens to 2000, you know, teens and then we kind of stepped away from the scene I got kind of burned out with it. And, you know, just as it was sort of picking up, like, you know, kind of crypto cooties, crypto punks, that kind of stuff. And was, you know, sort of sitting on the sidelines all mad. But then, you know, got, you know, the community, you know, learned about it and, you know, we got kind of brought back into it and still are, you know, definitely using that form and engaging with those kinds of collector people, you know, that scene, you know. But there was a period in between that was where we had kind of turned away from it and we're doing other things. I think that's what we're showing.
Yeah.
Speaker 2 | 01:11:43
Yeah. Kevin was heads down on this monograph idea. And so we had been thinking about like, okay, what if we wanted to do some short films, what would those be? What would it be about?
So we embarked on a 10 year odyssey of making these three shorts called Broker, Cleaner and Quitter. And we started with Broker, I think with just the impetus that we had always had these small cameras in our work. And these were kind of the year where like, you know, kind of surveillance cameras were going online with things like Nest and Home and Yi and these kinds of cameras.
So we were like, what if we like, found a luxury apartment and rigged this up. It was 2016. And this was shown like in October of 2016. And, you know, the idea was like, my God, that's so funny. Trump is running for president.
You know, this will be a footnote to history. But let's shoot this in Trump Tower.
So we, you know, rented a luxury apartment in Trump Tower as our set. And the conceit of the project is there There's this real estate broker who's kind of trapped in this like house as machine. And she's endlessly kind of exploring this idea of luxury. And we're like, you know, maybe we should make it an opera and have this whole sung part.
So, you know, it's a it is a short film, but we mostly have shown it as an installation. It kind of loops in a nice way where she, you know, kind of goes through this whole like apartment showing and then restarts itself. Again with you know with where it left off again so she's kind of endlessly looping through this dialogue in these songs it was i think you know it's in a book now this one of the people who saw it wrote a chapter about this piece for a book about i think he called it Is it Trump a space or something Trump space it's like the other architecture of, you know, kind of late capital and how, you know, these sort of luxury items that were, you know, ridiculed or frowned upon by the avant-garde have been like completely like, you know, subsumed into everyday living. I don't know, Kevin, do you want to show a little clip if I stop sharing? I could try and see if it will load, but this one little clip wasn't loading before.
Jenn McCoy | 01:14:12
Let Maybe it'll just work.
Speaker 2 | 01:14:14
Me see. So yeah, it's the first frame, but I don't know if it will-- let's see.
Jenn McCoy | 01:14:21
Can I click over? No, I think it's working. Is that what you mean?
Speaker 2 | 01:14:24
No, I did it. I did it.
Jenn McCoy | 01:14:26
Wait. Do you see my window? No, this is my window.
Speaker 2 | 01:14:30
Just don't share.
Jenn McCoy | 01:14:32
There's a Trump share.
Speaker 2 | 01:14:33
Okay. It's a 20 minute film, so this is just a tiny piece.
Video | 01:15:49
Tori. Place order. Mineral water.
Speaker 2 | 01:16:00
So important to be able to offer something.
Video | 01:16:11
May I get you some Pellegrino sparkling or Evianston?
Speaker 2 | 01:16:12
Water?
Video | 01:16:25
Influencing others isn't the magic It's a science There are proven ways Successful as a marketer, a politician.
Speaker 2 | 01:16:51
Okay, I'll stop there. Yeah, I mean, we had so much fun writing the script. There was like a 10-minute song about marketing that was just about to unfurl. And like 100% of the lyrics come from the internet.
Totally cut up script about marketing techniques, which seemed really funny at the time, but is actually just maybe common sense the way things operate today. But we just sort of finished the last film.
So the first one was Broker, which that was a clip of. The second one is Cleaner very prescient. We were artists in residence at Kickstarter and shot it at their headquarters.
And then the pandemic happened. And now the headquarters are completely mothballed. And it's just like a molder abandoned office. This building.
So we're dying to get back in there and, you know, might fake our way in and be like, we need an office building just to do some more filming. Cause it literally had like a central, like a courtyard of this beautiful garden and a roof garden that was all resplendent. And I can only imagine that it's like overgrown and in crazy disarray and covered with snow now.
So it would be really interesting to get back in there. And cleaner was the sort of tagline is, you know, it's from the point of view as the person who's cleaning the tech office. And so there's these different kinds of labor, you know, one very physical and visible and then the other one invisible and, you know, networked. And the cleaner is a ballet dancer. And so we have these incredible scenes of her, you know, kind of, you know, vacuuming through the architecture and, you know, yeah.
You know, kind of doing these arabesques on office tables and, you know, moving through the space with her body in a really interesting way. And then the third film is called "Quitter," prescient. We tried to shoot this right as the pandemic was starting, and it's like, don't call a project "Quitter" if you actually want to finish it. It kept getting delayed in locations and actors, and finally we finished it, you know, just a month or two ago.
So the plan is to do a triple script screening here in the city as soon as we can get one organized. So, yeah, it's been interesting and, you know nice, like, you know, we were all talking about objects and, you know, portability and shipping and exhibition.
So it was just interesting to really just do some, you know, single channel videos that even if they're mostly shown as installations are Fairly transmissible and I think broker has been shown the most widely. So we're, you know, ongoing to figure out how these like weird independent shorts are going to have a life.
Jenn McCoy | 01:19:48
-.
Speaker 2 | 01:19:50
Right. I think we just have one, two more projects that are like super like what we're working on now.
Jenn McCoy | 01:19:58
Yeah, so Lensi and Sky. So this was originally an NFT project, right?
Yeah. And so this one is, we were just thinking about these, again, it's a kind of an A plus B sort of thing.
So with these, you can see from this image that there's these kind of like cutout shapes, these kind of irregular collage-like boundaries and zones. And so in this piece, those shapes, and there's another one, those zones come from classic modernist landscape photography, like Ansel Adams. For example.
And then what we would do is replace the content of those zones with AI generated material. So like artificial landscapes of the same type.
So where something would be was rocks or where something was sky or where something was water, we would replace those things with AI generated material of the same type to create these sort of dynamic moving collages. And the thought was in my mind on that was that those classic modernist works like Paul Strand or Ansel Adams really created the idea of landscape photography as it's understood in the 20th century. That's really the origin point. And so in our view, it's this sort of cultural unconscious that feeds into everybody's, you know, it's in the background of people's minds as they're like taking all these pictures. And of course, all those pictures being on the internet is the training data that then went to go into the production of these models.
So it's a sort of like cultural unconscious of these image models in some way, shape, or form. So this idea of this kind of like stencilized, cut out, ghostly presence of the original object that replaced with these fully synthetic pieces of material, you know, seemed like it was a good idea, you know? - Yeah, and.
Speaker 2 | 01:22:07
It comes from the sort of database aesthetics of the very first project we showed, where instead of like harvesting things from a television show or, you know, from the internet, obviously, you know, it was like, well, okay, we wanna have like a large variety of images and AI seemed like a really interesting way to dive into kind of the collective archive. So we built up, you know, like a thousand images, I think that like would, feed through. And the prompts were like, you know, rain on the Mississippi Delta, you know, half dome at sunrise. And so it was creating these like, there's like prompts from all 50 states that are then kind of just piled in, you know, more or less like Kevin wrote a little script that would like just grab random images.
So we like had a couple thousand to look at and settled on a group of 300 that we would, you know, make a collection out of. And then the animations were just super, you know, very subtle animations done in After Effects to, you know, sort of by hand, just to really, you know, kind of bring those to life.
So we're still working on, we're working on a different series related to this now called Phase Diagrams. That are more about rocks and formations, but in a similar kind of strategy. And those have been, you know, kind of interesting to do as an ongoing series.
And then we're did a little bit of backwards engineering and decided like what would happen if we built these out of, you know, real materials, sort of handmade high tech. So there's a bunch of physical collages that are being, you know, that we're making that are thinking about, you know, national geographic and like nature photography is a resource, but again, like cramming them into these like very artificial, you know, static compositions.
And then I think this is the last project, Kevin, that we wanted to talk about.
Jenn McCoy | 01:24:03
Yeah, we've had this thing, this part of our practice that has been going on for the last five years or so. But it comes from ideas we were thinking about just ages ago. And Going back to kind of kinetic, robotic. Robots. Robots. Going back to robots in different ways. But just thinking about this as a form of painting and drawing.
So, you know, so this is a kind of plotter. You know, we've essentially been kind of thinking about plotters in different ways. And so have built and rebuilt and experimented with all of these different ways of thinking about a automatic image making system, but focusing on paint mostly. And so this particular version of it, we have a different version of it now in our studio, but in this particular version of it, we were invited to do this project in the window of this gallery in New York and wanted to have it, have our system kind of make these paintings dynamically on the window over time. And we would be there in this kind of funny maintenance mode of, you know, little suits, you know, kind of there zookeeping the device as it made these images. And these images are this kind of like collage thing drawn from photos that we had taken in and around the High Line, which is a park that runs right through this area in New York. And so it was this robotic painter plotter idea, but installed in more of a performance mode, I would say, done in this kind of public capacity. And so this lives on in our studio. We do works on paper and works on canvas with it as well too, but this was a kind of public iteration of it and kind of showcasing the machine and the process of it. That we did in this particular one last year. It was fun.
Speaker 2 | 01:26:13
Yeah, I think it's been really interesting to explore, you know, this idea of a tool, again, that you're kind of turning over to the public. I mean, it's great to use this tool to do things. And we've tried to think about, you know, what can drawing do well and what is drawing difficult? And one thing that drawing is, you know, makes drawing difficult is doing something, you know, site specific.
So the plotter is really good at that. So we did a piece called Paper Mirror where we drew a reflection of the view across the street.
And then it was a pandemic project where the gallery wanted to be closed so they would only show stuff in their windows. So we were able to kind of simulate the reflection with this, you know, massive drawing that was, you know, really detailed.
So we've been, you know, thinking about ways in which this can, you know, kind of participate in the dialogue we've had with, you know, creating live, you know, things that form images in a live way with, you know, immediacy and how that can extend to a drawing or painting, you know, practice. So it's been, it's been cool. And I think it's, you know, there's plotters that come from, you know, mathematical, you know, strategies, ours come more from image processing.
So kind of connects to, some of the camera work that we were doing, you know, super early. Yeah, but that, that's kind of the whole shebang there.
So great. Look how many people are here. Okay, now I.
Jenn McCoy | 01:27:44
Can see. I know. Amazing. Thanks, guys. Let us ramble on for an hour and a half. Jesus.
Haiver â € | 01:27:50
It's really exciting to hear, again, what this arc is and what it means. I mean, you've worked in so many different mediums with finding those threads. I really appreciate you said at the beginning that it makes sense when you look back on it, but in the middle of the muddle of it, trying to figure out like it is a very different thing.
Jenn McCoy | 01:28:07
Nothing but confusion. Is.
Speaker 2 | 01:28:09
Broker available to watch or just screenings? I can give you guys the passwords for all three. Let me send them to Haver.
Jenn McCoy | 01:28:17
And I know you guys talked about 45 minutes of Moussafa. And Mustafa really wasn't designed for, to be looked at in a kind of like sit down and watch the whole thing. Although I think- We It really is a sort of film installation that is meant to kind of have a kind of come and go.
Speaker 2 | 01:28:28
Tortured you, I'm so sorry.
Jenn McCoy | 01:28:36
But I do think there's some, and I certainly have sat through all 45 minutes of it. Many times. But there is something very kind of physical that happens in that endless my fucking God. When the God, something's happening.
Speaker 2 | 01:28:45
Chickens come, you guys must have been like my.
Jenn McCoy | 01:28:49
Yeah, when the chickens come at the end, you're like my God, look at those chickens.
Haiver â € | 01:28:51
The chickens were really meaningful. The chat in that moment lit up quite fully, which was great.
Yeah, I mean, it was fun to think about the connection of the moving camera in these spaces and to think about, it was nice to see even on the Vimeo link you shared that we could see the comment of you talking about how the transmission was used to be able to just kind of pull the car along and think about, yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, both the meaning making those happen, but the technology to make it happen. Yeah, definitely. Kevin, I know you need to run. I do need.
Jenn McCoy | 01:29:19
To go. I've got to go talk to some grad students. But yeah, so my sage advice for artists is the only rule is do not stop. That really is the only rule. Just keep going. It's not over. You don't need permission and you don't need anything. You can just keep on going and just keep doing it. And if you just keep doing it, who knows what the hell is going to happen. Maybe something will happen, but you're making it and you're doing it. And in the process, like looking back at this kind of stuff that's sort of building up and whatever, and that has, you know, that, Color is what comes next, you know?
So it's like, just keep going. Go. That's it. Okay, I'm going to close my laptop and Jen can... Add some more stuff but I'm gonna jump and we'll see you guys I guess we're seeing you in a couple of weeks so yeah.
Speaker 2 | 01:30:04
We'll see you in February we'll unpack a project in detail that is so much not cooked yet that we will cook it together so yeah it'll be really fun I'm.
Haiver â € | 01:30:16
Very excited for that craft workshop piece of it yeah so that's in two weeks from today which is exciting and then The Jen and Kevin are now in the app.
Speaker 2 | 01:30:26
So we promise we'll lurk and I'll put the Vimeo links there. Yeah, I would love to hear feedback and that'd be great.
Haiver â € | 01:30:32
Yeah, I'm really I've never seen all of broker. So I'm very excited for that as well. I've been hearing about it for such a long time for me just in conversation.
So that'll be fun. And Yes, so they'll be in there, drop into the Art Lectures discussion channel and ask questions of Jen and Kevin. They're going to be around for the next few weeks with us lurking, if you will, but that's why they're here. And otherwise, we'll see you. I'll see all of you next week.