Speaker 1 | 00:00
Hi art friends. I'm so glad to have you here with us again today. We are joined by Sarah Rothberg. She is a professor at NYU in their ITP program and an artist as well. Who had a really amazing solo show last year at Bitforms. For anyone who knows ITP, especially for the creative coders in the room, that's the same program where Daniel Shiffman teaches. We love that. They do a really incredible job at merging thinking around art and design and emerging technologies. I would remind us here that a paintbrush is a piece of technology just as a palette knife that we might use is a piece of technology.
So. She's here today because we are He's here today with us to talk about creativity in particular. A lot of us have been making things for many years in our practice in different ways and we start to get in a groove, things are working for us, but the longer we're in a particular groove, it starts to turn into a rut at times. And she has a lot of really incredible creative strategies and exercises for us today that will help us break out of our creative ruts and to help us think about how our practice operates both in our specific mediums. And the exercises will start kind of broad and then work their way into those our own particular practices and mediums, as well as ways to think about the context in which our practice might operate. Is our practice operating in a public sphere or is it in a gallery sphere? Who is the audience that we're playing to?
So these exercises will creatively stretch us today in, I think, really fun and exciting ways. So I'm excited to welcome Sarah Rothberg, and she'll tell you a bit more about herself.
Speaker 2 | 02:01
Well, thank you first for having me, Haver. It's always fun to see like new inventions by artists that have to do with teaching and pedagogy. Not to start with an apology, but I teach a lot on Zoom and I'm in a new virtual environment here.
So I'm hoping that I don't do anything weird, but if I do, I apologize in advance. But I can see you all in the chat.
So if you have any, see your faces on the little grid. So if you, feel like emoting, I would appreciate that because I like knowing that the words I'm saying are being heard. As I think most artists do.
So let me just start off with that was great. A heart explosion. Okay, so let me just start off with a little bit about what we're going to do. I'm going to introduce myself. We're going to do a few different kinds of activities that will hopefully be generative to you, even if they seem a little bit out there compared to how you normally work. I'm hoping that everyone, there's something in here for everybody...
So to tell you a little bit about myself, because I think it's really important to know who's talking to you when you're getting advice or insight into something. As Haver mentioned, I'm an artist. I typically work in interactive media, but sometimes I work in performance. Workshops, installation, format, Usually what I'm doing in my work is finding ways of approaching technologies from a critical perspective, or at least inviting my audiences to kind of think about the impact of these like new strange worlds we're making with new technology. I'll skip my accolades because they somehow feel embarrassing to read out loud. But some of my recent work, as Haver was mentioning, this is from my solo last year at BitForums. This is a really large body of work that started from thinking about how conversation is mediated through technology and how that changes the kinds of conversations we had and over the years morphed into this kind of AI platform interest in AI and the sort of personas of chatbots.
So this is a piece called Forever Meetings, which is chatbots in infinite conversation with each other. Some of my work is kind of infrastructure, digital infrastructure as artwork.
So this is a live streaming platform co-created with several other artists called Thing.Tube, which is kind of an experiment in software development as an art form. So it's an artist-made live streaming platform for artists that is very wacky.
Some of my performance work centers around.. Kind of the impact of language models on the way that we speak.
So this is from a performance called Human in the Loop, which was an audience, like a performance where the script was live generated based off of conversations that the audience had just had. So the sort of audiences watching the AI doppelganger versions of themselves replayed moments after they just had these conversations. I'll skip through that one.
So you can sort of see I kind of come from this multidisciplinary background, And that's really informed a lot by the context of where I'm currently teaching, which is at ITP. I'm not sure if I'm sure some of you know ITP, but it's kind of a very old program started in the 70s. It used to be called the Alternate Media Center. And it was kind of one of the OG places that was like, what if we brought , And, engineering, you know, other kinds of backgrounds and say, what if we sort of use this as a place to explore new technologies together that isn't tied to any specific discipline? And that really sort of informs kind of the techniques that I'm going to share with you today.
So some of the classes that I teach there are like intro to media art class. I teach this course called Critical Experiences, which is a research-based art practice class. And I'm the head of the thesis program in the IMA low res program, which is a new grad program, which is an online kind of very kooky program. Interdisciplinary program where people are all over the world somewhat similar in that way to the program you're doing here a very different emphasis so If any of these... Resources are interesting to you. Let me know because a lot of the work I'm doing as a research project with my academic hat on is kind of figuring out how to bring this sort of interdisciplinary creative thinking and research-based art practice in these anti-disciplinary environments to the public.
So I have this resource that contains a lot of these kind of exercises. That we are going to be doing together... The last little piece I was going to say has to do with sort of this ecosystem of teaching and art practice is kind of intertwined, I'm sure. Given the diversity of this group's background, a lot of you think about teaching as part of your practice. And so a lot of the work that I do kind of sits at that intersection. Which I can talk about this work later, I guess, is maybe the point as I will move forward to the activities is what I'm Sensing.
So to kind of Bank off of what Haver was saying, I think some of the way of framing these activities for you is to try to bring a sort of openness to interrogating both the context and the form that you're working in as part of the overall ecosystem of your practice. So from what I understand, a lot of you are working in sort of more traditional media, some of you, and feel free to jump in if I'm mischaracterizing this, but Some people are working as painters and some people are coming in with digital media.
Some people are maybe moving into different forms or not sure where their work will land in the end or in front of whom or in what context. And I think that trying to approach that question with creativity is interesting.
So I'll give this little anecdote about that. Back in the early days of like VR, part three or whatever, like 2016, I was teaching this class with half film students and half ITP students with a co-teacher from the film department named Carol Dysinger. And she said this thing, which was like, she looked at the filmmakers and she was like, you all know when you're making a movie, it's probably going to end up in a movie theater or on Netflix or whatever. You can sort of imagine where it is. For a lot of artists and for the other students in the class, one of the sort of possibilities you have is to invent the movie theater.
So you might be... You know, and the more I thought about this, I was like, you know, as an artist, you might be inventing the camera. In this analogy. And so trying to pull out and understand like, there is the work that you're making, like the sort of artifacts or objects that you're producing, but to zoom out and say, actually, everything is at play. Everything is possible to be part of your creative practice, including where you show it, what form it takes, how people consume it, how you made it. And I think that's maybe the approach that I'm going to bring with some of these exercises. Haver, did that make sense?
Speaker 1 | 09:46
HAVER NIEMAN: That made so much sense. That was great. Thank you. I really appreciate the way you think about-- Framing the context. And it's interesting to think about how for artists in our program who are working with paint or illustration, sculpture, photography, as well as our tech-based artists, of which we is probably half the program, how they think about their tools and trying to reframe the way they're thinking about their tools or expand their thinking that they've been doing what has been done for centuries, perhaps, in some cases. And how can we move the needle on that?
Speaker 2 | 10:20
Great. Thank you. I gave Haver the heads up. I think as an interactive media artist, I don't think I've ever given a lecture that doesn't involve interacting with the people who are in the lecture.
So I asked Haver to be my plant so I could ask him the questions that I normally ask my students. People who I'm working with so thank you Haver for playing along with me so here's what we're going to be doing today an anti-disciplinary approach to conceptualizing stretching and exploring new directions in your practice and we're going to start with this workshop that I've run in various forms over the years which is called an affordances workshop I'm curious maybe I can see the zoom chat If anybody's heard this term affordances before, and if you can put into the chat, like what context you've heard, - Heard of it, heard of, heard it in before. Or if you've never heard of it, Right, okay, so we have someone from user experience. It's actually used sometimes in two different ways in the context of user experience, which is really interesting. I'm gonna use it, I think, in the less common UX context way.
So affordances is, it's kind of an old term. It comes from its first mention in the English language as far as I found and as far as this person claims for himself is from this book called The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. And I'll just read this. The affordances of the environment are what it offers to the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or for ill. The verb to afford is found in the dictionary. The noun affordance is not. I've made it up. That's how I know he made it up because he told us.
I mean by it something that refers to both the environment and the animal, which can mean user or audience, which we can talk about in a second, in a way that no existing term does. It implies the complementary of the animal and the environment. And it became sort of popular in the '80s with the release of this book. Which is a very famous book. Called "The Design of Everyday Things." which is where the kind of UX context for it came. Affordances provide strong clues to the operations of things. Plates are for pushing, knobs are for turning, slots are for inserting things into. The kind of classic example for this is, I'm just going to skip forward and back really quick, is a door panel, like a doorknob is shaped like a hand. It's easy to grab. It affords turning. Whereas a panel is, doesn't have that sort of grab shape, you push it. If you saw a door that you were supposed to open and it had a panel, it would be very difficult and confusing because our hands aren't magnetic or whatever that would take.
So The reason that I bring this up is in, you know, I think it's a very clear how this applies to design and maybe less clear how it applies to art. So I'm going to try to make a little bit of an argument for this right now, because I I'm not suggesting that art and design are the same thing. And I could talk about, Hit me up if you want to talk about that for like five hours. But there is something that I think is helpful to pull from that. And it's sort of encompassed in this idea of publics. Maybe that's something that you are all familiar with. Has anyone ever read this essay, Publix and Counterpublics? It's, by an author called Michael Werner. And basically, He defines one of the abilities of art as doing one of two things. Either it's speaking to an existing public, which means that the audience for it sort of exists and you're providing a, you're either, What is the word I'm looking for? Commiserating or building solidarity or sort of speaking or acting as an example for a public that exists, like an art public, or maybe your art is creating a counter public, which is those who sort of flock to Understand Your Work is a temporary public that's been created by your work, but in any, that's not the best explanation in the world, but I recommend the essay if you want a more articulate version. But the idea is that whenever you make something and put it into the world, whether you're thinking about the public of your work or not, It exists within an ecosystem. And understanding that ecosystem and understanding how, what sort of affordances that you might think of when you zoom out and see your work as an ecosystem that relates like the author, the context, why you're doing what you're doing in a sort of broader sense. I think that you don't have to let it overtake you, but it can sort of offer you a different way to think about how you might make things and approach making things. Does that make some semblance of sense, Haver? Any questions on that or any questions from the chat before we jump into this? -.
Speaker 1 | 15:22
Yeah, drop questions in the chat if you have them so far. I mean, the first thing that comes to me, it's really interesting the use of the word counterpublics, because it implies that when you make a new public around your art, that you are, therefore, your counterpublic is in contravention or in opposition in some way to the standard public perhaps. I'm curious how you think about that in your own art practice.
Speaker 2 | 15:47
My gosh, in my own art practice? I mean, you could say that every artist creates their own counterpublic, which is basically what you might refer to more colloquially as your audience, which is the people who follow my work are interested in this same set of things that I'm interested in. And there may be no other person not to say this is special about myself, this is true for every artist that has that particular combination of interests and therefore the counter public that's created by any individual's artist work otherwise might not exist.
Like those particular people might not gather because that's a place where that artist's interests and the audiences who share those interests So I think it's, Maybe that's a bit abstract, but I think I've never said that out loud, but I think it made a lot of sense. Yay.
Speaker 1 | 16:32
It did. I like that.
Speaker 2 | 16:35
Aside from the sort of affordances view, I think that artists are always working with affordances and what you could call hidden affordances, which are kind of like, if anyone is a musician here, I think extended techniques is kind of a way. Like when you see a concert where like someone's not just playing piano, but they're like plucking the piano strings or like plopping the piano with the vegetable or something like that's what you would call a hidden effort i've never seen that performance i just made that up A hidden affordance, right? What are the possibilities of the medium, the tool, and perhaps even the context or the way that you're connecting with an audience? All of those different things have affordances that I find it's very helpful to try to just explicitly lay out.
So the very first thing we're going to do, it's going to feel a little bit silly. But... Oopsies. And I'll just fly through these, but there's a lot of examples of artists who think about the affordances of their medium and their context in ways that really feel like the most important aspect of their art. Jenny Holzer, for instance, I like placing content where people look and that can be at the bottom of a cup or a shirt or a hat. I use language because I want to offer content that people, not necessarily art people, could understand.
So these are ways that Jenny Holder is talking about her work that I would say are understanding the affordances of the medium, the tool, the context, the materials that she's working with. And again, I have sort of like a long list of those things. Artists that I think do this, Happy to share some of these with you. This one is a funny example, which is a game that you can only play when your phone is at 3% battery.
So the urgency of the phone having very little battery left is what gives you the urgency to win the game. So let's do this activity. This is step one. And I think if you're watching this after the fact, you can totally do this on your own, which is to look at your desk or look around the room or see where it is that you are. And try to find something, probably best if it's something that you can sort of pick up, you know, anything like this, that, whatever. And you're going to spend Let's just do three minutes, I think, because you can repeat this on your own. Writing down or typing up Every possible affordance that you can think of that's associated with that And those might be the obvious affordances, like for instance, with my these wired headphones, I can listen to music, but I could like make a belt. Or something. Or it affords... I don't know. I don't want to oversee you. Does that make sense as far as the Haver? Would you be able to do that based off of what I... Just said.
Speaker 1 | 19:38
A little bit. I think thinking in terms of like what are verbs you can do with a thing or what are uncommon uses for it. But where does it meet you in your body, like in your hands as an animal, as the original quote from 1979 put it.
Speaker 2 | 19:56
Exactly. So... Maybe we'll spend...
Yeah, three minutes. I'll put a little timer on. Just doing that.
And the key here is to just try to exhaust all possibility. So even if it seems completely ridiculous.
You have one minute left, so keep writing. Just try to really exhaust it, even if they feel similar to each other.
Is the time. Timer has gone off. Okay, so this next step, this one's going to feel a little silly. And remember, this is a warm-up. It will likely have nothing to do with your own art practice.
Though I personally am of the belief that we are single people and everything you make is within the realm of things you would make. What I want you to do is hone in on one of the affordances that you listed.
So one really specific thing that you're object can do. So for instance, like... I'm very interested in this activity right now for some reason. And I want you to try to figure out how can you use that single affordance to of this object to try just like a little puzzle. To try to convey one of the concepts on the right side of the slide.
So, and it's going to be difficult. Okay. It's just trust me and go with it. So for instance, how would I use this action to convey feeling confused but trying to hide it. And you can think of it as like something you would do as a performance or you could think of it as something you would document or a sculpture or as a like whatever it is.
So I'm going to give you maybe like a minute or so to do that and Just to raise the stakes a teeny tiny bit afterward, we're going to put you in a hair to share it out. If you are watching this at home. You can email me a video of yourself doing it. You could just try it and then... See what it, what comes out of it. But I think that it's nice to try and imagine you have an audience for this.
So maybe in, another two minutes or so if you want to take pictures of your thing, but this is sort of active. If anyone has any questions, you could drop them in the chat. Interesting. But otherwise, I'll put on the two minutes and then in two minutes, we'll put you in these groups to perform your affordance to somebody else.
Pressure is on. You have one more minute.
If you don't feel comfortable sharing what you made, you can just sort of talk it through with your... Interlocutor, see maybe they have an idea. For something.
Again, I know I said the stakes were high, but truly the stakes couldn't be lower.
All right, Haver. You do the magic of sending them to the duos.
Speaker 1 | 27:42
I will. So I'm going to make 10 breakout rooms. I'm going to let participants choose your room. And the reason is there's a couple of people who are tuned in while at work, and so they won't be able to participate in conversation.
So I'm making those rooms now.
Speaker 2 | 27:57
And we'll come back in like six minutes. Does that sound good?
So three minutes for each person. So if you're just going to be on your own for six minutes, that's when you should come back.
Speaker 1 | 28:08
Perfect. And at the five minute mark, you'll see the timer pop up that we're calling you back in one minute.
So you don't have to come back manually on your own. All right, go forth. We'll see you in a second.
Speaker 2 | 28:20
Everyone's coming back. Welcome.
Speaker 1 | 28:23
Yeah, they'll take 40 seconds to just like straggle in, which is fine.
Speaker 2 | 28:28
Yeah. I mean, I'm curious in the meantime if anyone wants to drop in the chat if anyone had any wonderful... Innovations or how that felt to do. Probably silly, right? But maybe as we're talking, Haver shared that the object-- can you share your object again, Haver, that you were looking at?
Speaker 1 | 28:50
I can. So I have a tape measure here. It is yay big. It shrinks down. It stretches out. And it has both inches and millimeters. And it is vinyl.
So it has a little bit of stretch to it, except it doesn't. It feels like it would have stretch. But I wonder if I hang on it for a really long amount of time, like, can I make it sad by it slowly drooping? But I can't. I came up with like some fun uses for it.
Like I came up with, obviously I'm measuring my waist with it. I can measure the height of a liquid. It's fun to think about how to measure liquid with a linear thing. I could jump rope with it. I could Use it as a bandana or a necklace or a bracelet and tie it off in some way around me. Which I guess is the thing I could I Use it as a fastener around a package to secure it in some way, or use it as a bow on a present.
And then I got into the weird stuff. Then I was like, all right, I'm having trouble holding my chopsticks so I can wrap it around my hand and the chopsticks to like lock it in. Or I can use it as a pull up rope. Or I could use it as an Airbnb security measure to like tie it on the doorknob and then to something in the room so the door wouldn't open if someone came in the middle of the night, which. It always scares me, if I'm being honest.
So those are the things I came up with. And then I think from your list here, which I want to pull back up.
So I started thinking about feelings in particular. And I was thinking about sadness and feeling confused and started thinking about like some kind of performance art piece in which I am using it as my like pull-up bar and I'm just like hanging from the middle of it and the longer I hang there like it's just an endurance thing I don't have to do pull-ups I can just hang but the longer I hang the vinyl would stretch out and like express some of those feelings through It's transformation as an object and it's weird, like, non-purpose use.
Speaker 2 | 31:00
Yeah, it's such an interesting object. It really has so many qualities to it. And especially for me, when you showed that object, I was like, " the numbers are really interesting." Like being able to change the numbers or-- I think one of the affordances that is interesting with a lot of sort of objects, and maybe this is helpful in your work regardless of what medium you're thinking of, is sometimes the form itself can act as a metaphor So... The very associations with the measuring tape and what it's normally used for and then subverting that use, even if you're using it for something like a pull-up bar that has nothing to do with measuring, that creates like a potential for meaning making.
So we're not going to talk about metaphor, even though that was one of the things that we considered, but, Something to keep in mind is that sometimes an affordance has some potential for metaphor as well. Okay, so... Here's where I think you can maybe try to figure out how you might connect this with some of your own interests. And if you haven't been able to tell one of the things that I think is really, helpful during the kind of ideation phases is loosening your grip on your own tendencies through adding kind of constraints of randomness. I think it's like a way to kind of keep yourself fresh and honest and not fall into the trap of just making things that you already know how to make, or that you've already made before.
So, I... I'm going to suggest that we do this exercise that has this randomness.
So the way that we're going to do the randomness is to write down a number between 1 and 10. Or just think of it. And now imagine that for some reason, I have the word technology here, but I adapted this so it's not all technologies. For some reason, You have to work with the thing. One of the constraints you have in this project or in this context, in this next thing that you're working with, it has to involve, let's say you had, Picked seven. It has to be in a very loud room.
So what I want you to do is try to imagine we're going to do this exercise, kind of repeat what we just did. But you're going to imagine first the affordances of one of the things on this list, materials and you can choose a different one. I'm not going to come after you if you choose something that wasn't the one you picked. But I don't want you to choose a medium that you typically work with. Choose a medium or context that you don't typically work with. And I want you to start by listing those affordances.
So we're going to do that again for like a two minute chunk. And then... I want you to try to say, okay, if I were going to pick one of these affordances and try to bring in some aspect that already exists in my own your real art practice, something you actually care about, not just something from the list that I gave you. How could you sort of match those things together? Even if you end up with something that you've never, that you'll, you would never do, it doesn't fit. You're not interested in that.
Like it doesn't, you're not, you don't want to make a video or whatever. I find that this kind of like A to C thinking where you start with something, you know, you bring in something sort of random.
Sometimes the thing that you produce in the middle is, even if it's not directly applicable to the thing that you're working on now, it tells you something about your own sort of artistic inclinations and tendencies and desires and ways of working. So, Heyward, do you think we have time to actually do that? Or do you think that we should just bump to the next?
Speaker 1 | 34:37
This is great. Yeah, no, I think connecting it with the students, art practice in particular.
So the idea here is that coming up with the affordances related to the random one through 10 that they picked, whichever that is. So what are the affordances of a-
Speaker 2 | 34:51
Video?
Speaker 1 | 34:53
What are the affordances of a tiny painting and so forth?
Speaker 2 | 34:56
Exactly. And then the same process, pick one of, so what if we'll give like six minutes total for this and maybe we can have some people share out at the end. What are the affordances of this thing from this list? Then, you know, two or three minutes doing that, choose your favorite affordance or the one that speaks to you as relevant and try to say, if I were to take something from my own art practice and leverage that affordance with this, a theme or a metaphor, you know, an image, whatever, I don't know, you all probably have very different starting points. What could that possibly look like?
So we'll do like maybe five minutes for that all together.
And after you've listed the affordances, just You can think of the way that you bring them together either by writing up a description or by making like a little drawing or a sketch of what that would look like. I think that The sketch is preferable if you can, if you're a visual. Person.
You have about a minute. So hopefully some brave souls will want to share something out.
Okay. What flavor do you think anyone is going to share?
Speaker 1 | 40:40
Welcome back. Yes, everyone's really good about sharing here.
So whatever you've been making, drop something in the chat about that. I'm excited to... See what you came up with. I started working with the tiny painting as my restriction and my The affordance for me that was most resonant is that it really encourages standing close to it. You have to get close to see it large. And so that meant that I could play with scale in interesting ways in the generative work that I was doing.
So I could build things into the frame of said tiny painting, in which I might-- I don't know. I don't work with Raspberry Pis, but I was like, I'd love to do a little LED frame for this tiny painting and merge my digital and physical. But you have to get really close, like the I would want a really high resolution screen so I could do really fine lines that reward being able to stand close.
Speaker 2 | 41:39
That's really lovely.
I mean, there's this great book part as experience. I don't know if you are all familiar with it and it's quite old. I believe it's from the 50s, but it might even be older. And one of the kind of arguments of the book is that, you know, all art, when viewed through the lens of you know, space and time are experiential.
So even, you know, you can think of like a sculpture as something you have to walk around or an image as something that like does relate to the ecosystem of the body, right? Like, do you need to get really close to it do you need to bend down to see it? Is there, you know, there is no seeing without the body.
So that sort of ecosystemic way and sort of understanding how scale at the very least, like perhaps this makes you think in your own work about some, Sit in assumptions that you have about your work scale is often one of them if you're often working at the same scale as what if you were working in another scale or What might that do? Or what might that even just open up creatively as a thought exercise? Because imagining things is free.
You know
Speaker 1 | 42:55
That's a great book. Yeah, John Dewey That book, Art as Experience, shows up in one of Professor Rebecca Millsop's takeaway guides for the philosophy of art classes we do.
So if you haven't already flipped through that, students, it's really good to check out. It's, I think, one of the best texts that any philosopher has ever written about how to approach art making.
Speaker 2 | 43:20
Yeah, it's a great book. He's a great thinker.
So maybe we'll just move to the next question. Exercise, if I may. So... I'll get to that little chart in a second. Ha. That skateboard chart. I'm very obsessed with it. Someone did jump in. I don't know, Haber, did you want to read that one? Out.
Speaker 1 | 43:49
JOHN MUELLER: Yeah. I had three biomaterials and thought about mycelium, which has the affordance that it grows in patterns. I thought about using as a random number generator, the mycelium.
So setting up a large Petri dish with some predefined selected areas marked out. Then letting the mycelium grow and after a predetermined amount of time looking at which areas are covered. And using that to generate numbers. I love that. My friend Clive Thompson wrote this great piece about Minecraft years ago and how kids were exploring making art and worlds and learning like technology and systems through that and he had this kid who needed a random number generator and he just put a cow in a pen that was like a grid of like three by three and it was a button on one square and the cow would hop around and every now and then it would accidentally step on the button in the process and that was so I love this like The mycelium, it kind of reminds me of the lava lamps too, that one... Cryptographic company uses. Nice. Love that.
Speaker 2 | 45:02
Interesting. Yeah, so what I would say, like, typically, for me, this can be an interesting place where, like, sometimes this ends, this exercise ends in, like, a very unwieldy and giant idea, especially if you're like, I picked... Times Square. And it would be very difficult to actually do any gut check around what that might look like.
So something else that I kind of pull from the world of design into the world of art is the concept of prototyping, which again, I think oftentimes, especially when I'm working with people with a more traditional fine art background can seem like a little bit like, well, what does it mean to prototype a painting? But a prototype is, it's exactly the same thing as making a sketch, right? But if you're working with these kind of assumptions, you know, with these unchecked assumptions around like, well, there's so many aspects of this project that was described in the chat that are really interesting. Prototyping is a way of just making the smallest scale version of the thing that allows you to check one of the assumptions about at work.
So lately I've been really obsessed with this extremely corny graphic, which I don't know. I have the feeling that the same person has seen this graphic who understood what affordances are. Which is how you describe most people when you approach making a sort of a new project, especially something that's never been possibly you've never made before or never has been made before. Most people approach things with this project management style called a waterfall technique. And a waterfall technique is sort of shown here on the top, which is like if you have a sort of a goal or a hunch that wheels might help people get to where they want to go faster and you dream up this idea of the car, And you're like, okay, to build a car, first, I'm going to make a wheel. Then I'm going to make a wheel with the platform that I'm going to make. Whatever this part is called, a chassis. I don't know what that is. And eventually, without ever having tested if People even want to go faster using wheels. You're going to make suddenly a car. And I think that that's like, I think kind of the most natural way to like approach making a really big project. And yeah, I would say, especially if you're working in... New media or even just a form that is unfamiliar to yourself, it's a lot more helpful to think of like, how can I prototype this in a way in which the sketch does something of the final job?
So this is pulled from this other kind of project management style philosophy called agile, which Again, I don't know. I think it's just a very interesting shift in philosophically how to make things, which is instead of saying, I'm going to wait and take all these steps until finally I have this amazing thing called the car. Can you first make something which is functional on some level towards your goal at every level?
So can I first make... A skateboard.
So for a painter, I think that might be like, can I make a sketch that just like still has some of the feeling, but for this mycelium project, you know, perhaps it's about first seeing what the random number generator feels like in something that feels in some way complete but still has room to build off of what you've learned for the next iteration, which is still sort of complete. It's a scooter and then a bicycle and then a motorcycle and then a car.
So that's the sort of little side step on prototyping that I think is something that you can draw from when you start to think about this larger ecosystem of your work and imagining that all of the pieces are sort of up for grabs in an art context. So I think we have time for one more sort of related question. Exercise Hopefully. Everyone's-- this one has this thing in it that I use all the time. It's like solid gold. It's very simple.
So maybe I'll try and go through it a little fast, because I would love to see if there's any questions at the end. But this is a very useful exercise for any time you're at a crossroads in a sort of larger project. And you're saying to yourself, I could either go this way or I could go that way. I could either do this or I could do that. And, Oftentimes there's the thing that you know, and then there's like a thousand things that you have no idea about.
So this is a kind of a way that I found is very like alleviating the stress of the infinite possibilities and making it... A more actionable sort of way to start something that pushes you outside of your sort of comfort zone and into like possibly unknown territory for yourself or your artistic practice.
So, to help stretch you and push you in a direction and to dream forward. So typically, I'm going to kind of do a reduced version of this one. But if you can pull out a piece of paper and just start by imagining the work that you're currently doing right now. And this is private. You're not going to have to share it with anyone. But I want you to spend like, maybe two minutes or three minutes, I'm going to put 2.5 minutes. Just kind of free writing about like what is exciting to you about the work that you're doing right now. And that can take any form.
Like what are the sort of, goals that you have with the work that might be like aesthetically, it might be personally, it might be interpersonally, it might be you know, how does it feel right now when you share it with people? Just kind of anything to kind of bring you back to thinking about like the work you're doing right now. I like this idea of appending in order tos.
Like infinite times onto the end of your sentence to just kind of get to the root of like, what are you actually doing and what you actually want, what's actually driving you forward. So I'll leave this slide up and I'll put it on for two minutes and 30 seconds just to kind of orient yourself back in your own practice for a minute.
We have about a minute left, so I recommend just automatic writing style. Just write whatever comes to mind. Shift directions at this moment. Pick a different question.
Okay. So now that you've sort of reoriented yourself back in your own practice and not all these random uses of a rubber band or whatever, we were all just brainstorming. I... I think it's helpful to sort of break this down or break the kinds of thoughts you're having down into some kind of schema. The schema that I most... Often use for myself when I'm sort of getting mired with like just too many decisions about the work are, Making a simple list of things that I want, things that I don't want, and the crucial middle portion, things that I'm okay with.
So for example, this slide deck, I want it to be clear I don't want it to be too long. I'm okay if it's kind of ugly. Kind of an ugly flight deck. So yeah, I think I put that here. So I would try and maybe spend like two minutes just kind of breaking that sort of last open-ended brainstorm into some kind of schema. You know, there are other kinds of schemas to use, but I think that one's the most useful. So yeah, I'll give you about a minute or two minutes to do that one. And this is with your practice, with the project you're currently working on or with like your practice in general.
And just food for thought that the things that you want, can be all over the map. They can be things that you want for the work itself. They could be things you want as a result of the work. For yourself. You're not going to necessarily read this list aloud to anyone, so feel free to write things that are embarrassing.
You know, I think it's actually good too. Be honest with yourself.
And you have about a minute with yourself, a minute left. So just try to really dial in, try to have at least like 10 things in each Bucket.
So. Typically, you know, if you... Are In a more... Kind of There's a, there's two sort of a fork in the road at this part in the exercise. If you're in a moment where you're sort of conceptualizing bigger vision for your practice, like kind of, if you think of your practice as like your career goals with your work, I do recommend doing this next part, but I'm going to skip it for now and I'll just sort of explain it. Which has to do with trying to understand those things on your list and how you might actually measure whether or not you reach those goals. And I think this might, it might feel very silly, but I do think that if you're trying to like reach a little bit beyond where you are in your practice right now, that can be really helpful.
So for example, you might want to look at one of those things on your list of the things that you want and ask yourself, well, what would that look like? Totally fulfilled, somewhat fulfilled or not fulfilled at all. And even better is if you can find a way of measuring that. And you never have to look at that again. I find it's just easy to try to articulate it to yourself so you sort of know. Whether or not you end up going back and being like, I did it, that's up to you and your style. But I do think that is kind of helpful to do in a way that doesn't like trap you into something scary. If that makes sense.
So now we'll do this other part, which is where we get to the thing that I think is the juiciest part of this exercise. And what we're going to be doing is, Haver, if it's okay to put everybody into pairs again, you're going to... Spend three minutes or so just talking to your partner about What did it feel like to... Do that brainstorming, describing a little bit about the project that you're currently working on with regards to those things. And you don't need to read what you wrote, just sort of explain where you're at with your work and try to, the other person who's listening, is going to try to help identify opposing desires or opposing forces or opposing manifestations of what the work might look like.
So for example, are they thinking that the work really speaks to, like on the level of audience, are they thinking that the work speaks to a broad audience versus an audience of experts? On the level of scale, is it small versus big? Things that it sounds like the other person hasn't quite decided yet and you can feel free to ask some questions too. And what you're going to be ultimately doing is creating for them this... Or suggesting to them, they can not accept it if they like, a matrix with two axes.
So one axis might be, for instance, the size, like a literal size, where the other axes might be , Okay, so it's big versus small versus on this axis, you might be like, it is, And it could be anything. It's inside versus outside.
Like any two things, the two axes shouldn't necessarily relate to each other at all. They do not have to be related. And I will explain what it is that we're going to do with that afterward.
So I think we should give everyone 10 minutes total, so five minutes each. And you can keep track of your own time. But the first minute, the first one, the one person is presenting, the other person is trying to make this matrix. For that person and then you switch You're trying to make the matrix for the other person. Does that make, Haver, is there anything I should clarify about that or questions in the chat?
Speaker 1 | 01:01:08
Do you have an example slide of just kind of what one looks like perhaps just.
Speaker 2 | 01:01:13
To give us a little more context. I do.
You know what I normally do? I promise that I wouldn't do this when I'm going to do it. I always do it like this. I just make it small. And I'm like, for instance, if it was big... I love live editing my slides while I'm teaching. Versus small. This axis is scale and then over here I would say it is made of wood. Or made of metal. But it could be like, this one is like, it's for kids versus it's for adults.
So you're trying to think of like what's one axis and what, you know, the two axes that have nothing to do with each other. And here's the sort of a list of different kinds of axes you might be listening for. Does that help clarify?
Speaker 1 | 01:01:56
A little. We had one question in the chat about what exactly they're presenting to each other.
So they've come up at this point with a list of 10 things of, you know, what they want in the work or don't want in the work or what they're okay with in the work. And now as they think about this matrix, How would you frame that for them?
Speaker 2 | 01:02:18
What I would try to do is imagine that the work that you were just doing was kind of background work for a way of thinking about what you're up to right now. And you should just be explaining to your partner kind of what you're working on right now, where you're at in your practice, perhaps some of the things that were on your list if you feel comfortable, but things that will lead them to being able to help you co-create these axes.
Speaker 1 | 01:02:40
Axes that you want to work within or find yourself on in a particular spot.
Speaker 2 | 01:02:46
Yeah, find yourself sort of on the fence about or possibly things that you haven't considered yet about your work. Yeah.
Yeah.
Speaker 1 | 01:02:54
Yeah, I think to the question in the chat, I would add that a lot of this is about jogging ourselves loose. We've been working on our practice for many of us for many years and we get into grooves and that groove can be good for a time but the longer you groove on something the deeper it can become a rut and so I think a lot of the tools Sarah shared today is about trying to figure out how to get out of those ruts and think about our practice in new ways so as we today in this exercise identified the key things that are important to us to include or not include in our work and I think the hope here is that it revealed some axes that your work might be operating on. Thank you. I'm going to open up the rooms again. Try and this time jump into a room with someone from your cohort if possible. I'm not quite sure what's going to happen when I click open rooms, if I'm being honest, because this app doesn't always love me. And so I might move you around really rapidly as you hop into rooms, just so there's more context that you have about each other's work already to operate from, so there's less to explain to one another. All right, here we go. Hey, everyone is back with us now. Hello. I'm going to put your slides back up on screen and you can do your reveal of the next step, which I'm very excited about.
Speaker 2 | 01:04:20
Okay. Hopefully, the making of The Matrix was already fun in itself, but the real amazing offering of this is actually the next step of it. And during the break, I was talking to Haver about how there's many different ways you can use this, but I'll explain, I'll show it first and then I'll explain.
So You've made this matrix and in the matrix, there are four quadrants that you can use. And in those quadrants... It's helpful if you describe a version of your work, a version of your project, where the two parts of those acts, this acts either true.
So let's say on your project, you were considering, well, I'm not sure if this is something that would be better as public art or better in a gallery space. And I'm not sure if it's like an app on a phone or if it's like an installation. This would be something you might be thinking at the very beginning of a project because those are huge decisions, right? But... What you do is you say, well, let me imagine a version of my project, which is both public art and an installation. What does the project look like? How does it change? How does the way you work on it change? What are the other aspects of it that you can sort of decide based off of that? And what if the project were an installation and it's in a gallery space?
Well, then you have an idea of the constraints of those projects. Parts of your matrix, or if it was an application that you wanted to show in a gallery space or, you know, an app, if it were an app that was public art.
So each of these versions, and obviously your matrix, your matrices are going to be very different from each other. Even this one, like, well, if it's for kids and it's made for metal, It might look like this and I might have to consider Are the kids going to hurt themselves on the metal or something? Or if it's made of metal and it's for adults, or if it's made of wood and it's for adults, like what are the different manifestations of your project? And the thing that we were, that Haver and I were discussing was, and actually Haver, maybe you want to ask this question again yourself, just because it's more fun that Your very good question was, can I make multiple of these for any project?
Speaker 1 | 01:06:22
Way. I don't remember my very good question.
Speaker 2 | 01:06:30
And I was thinking, Absolutely. So what I've noticed is that in the beginning of a project, the two axes are often more unrelated to each other.
So one might be about the physical manifestation of it or the form, and one might be about the space. But as you get to know your work better and the project becomes more focused, the two axes become more similar to each other. And you can start to use this to make very refined decisions about your work.
You know, we had this little mini chat about how does this apply to someone who works in a more emergent way? For instance, like a painter might be saying, well, the way that I work is that I just like I have my canvas, I open up.
You know, like I pull out my paints and I see what happens, but you know, which is amazing. It's an amazing way to work that doesn't necessarily have this kind of projection forward and working backwards. But you might find this as useful for instance, like when you're deciding, well, what kind of work do I want to put in a show? Or how do I want to lay out my work in a physical context?
So it may, for some of you, not be about the work itself. You might be really sure about that, but it might be around some of the other sort of decisions that have You know, one of the millions of decisions you have to make when you're in an art practice and the freedom of art affords that it can be anything, but it can mean that there's an overwhelming number of choices to make.
So I find this to be a very helpful way to sort of keep in line with like, well, what is the thing I'm doing and why am I doing it? And How do I sort of make something that connects to those goals?
So the very last piece of this is actually to look at these different versions in these extremely ugly and chaotic bubbles that I've created here and ask yourself, well, which of these best suits those goals? Which of these has the most things from the list of things that I want, the least things from the list of the things that I don't want and hopefully not too many things from the list of things that I'm just okay with. And I would say it's another way to sort of pull what that bubble is and try to prototype that thing, try to make the smallest version of it possible and allow that to sort of be generative for you and maybe make another version of that matrix when you run into different questions.
So I think that is where I will leave this activity with since we are exactly at three o'clock and I love ending things exactly on time. But I guess if you had any questions, I can stick around for a second. But I guess officially.
Speaker 1 | 01:09:01
Thank you for having me. Thank you for being here. Yes, drop any questions you still have in the chat. I'll field a few of them up. I think Prototyping is so fascinating to me. We were talking a little bit while everyone was in their breakout rooms. Prototyping is really, Like, I think... In the world where art can be anything, like in which the field is so wide open that can be very paralyzing for a lot of artists. And to instead realize, when I'm stuck, I can pick up one of these tools and start to hone in on what is most important to me. Or have I only been making paintings or only been making sculptures in this one way for many years?
Well, how might I rethink about my materials or what I'm putting into the work in new ways? So I love that for the first half of what we did today.
And then I really love prototyping because as you're trying out anything new, the question is, does it work the way you think it's going to work? And if you spend six months working your way toward making something new and then you get to the other side like, that was a failure. Could you have learned that faster by making whatever is the smallest version of it that will still function and test one of your hypotheses?
Like, do people want to move around on wheels? Do people want to move faster using wheels?
Like a skateboard will do that. Great, they like that. What if I add a handle to it and it becomes a scooter and so on?
So figuring out how to test those little things as you're experimenting, as you're stretching yourself as an artist this year, I think is the thing that's most exciting to me. I think I'll just close since we don't have any questions here in the chat by just saying we have, now that you have your matrices. Go ahead and take a few minutes here as you get off this call and jot in some ideas in the four quadrants of it. And we're really excited to hear in your cohorts in the coming weeks as we chat or in the Art Lecture Discussion channel of the app. The community app, what comes out of that as you're, again, trying to reevaluate your practice this year and where it fits in. Thank you again, Sarah. This was really wonderful and really inspiring. I think you gave us a lot of really good tools and helped us come at our practices slant.
So thank you for that. Thank you for being here.
Speaker 2 | 01:11:26
Great. Thank you so much. I was just going to say, if anyone wants to get in touch, you can find me online really easily. And this is, my name is Sarah Rothberg and good luck. I'm excited to see what you all do with this stuff and haver this is such an interesting and cool group so Please keep me updated on what happens with everybody.
Speaker 1 | 01:11:45
I will. I will. All right, everyone. We will see you in your cohorts later this week and have a good afternoon. Bye all.