Transcript:

Haiver | 00:01
Hello, everyone. Hello. Hi. Good to see you all. I hope you've had a good couple days this week slowly getting oriented to the program, to the calendar and how everything works. As you might have noticed today, the session replay for Tuesday's event went up. That is a very truncated section of just the first about 30 minutes with some sections trimmed out in which some inaccuracies were said about how the app works, as we noticed about replies this week was one thing we learned worked a little different than we first talked about. If you haven't yet, make sure you go to the news and updates tab and follow the instructions for syncing your calendar with the community's calendar If you did that on Tuesday, you should undo what you did and do it again. One thing that's changed in the instructions is to make sure that you're using the all events tab rather than the live sessions tab to subscribe to. And the reason is the all events tab will end up containing all of the All of the events.
So not just the live sessions, but your personal cohorts events will be included in there. So please just make sure you step back through and subscribe to the all events tab instead if you've already done it once. I threw in the nice little hex code.
So if you want to put your calendar event to have the same like peachy salmon color that all of the Artist Commons stuff does, like you have the exact hex code to do that with. So I thought that was a little bit fun. I'm super excited today that we have Professor Cheyenne Rudolph with us to talk about visual analysis. She teaches at several different institutions. As I might have said in our kickoff event on Sunday, I interviewed 70, I reviewed applications from 70 art historians, whittled it down to a dozen based on audition samples they sent in. We found some really great people who simply are Really good teachers, really good thinkers, really good at teaching on camera at distance with the charisma that I think it takes to do this well and keeps us engaged for the next 90 minutes.
So I'm super excited for everything she has to share. So I'm just going to pass it off to you.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 02:25
I did not realize I was one in 70. That's amazing. I'm so glad to be here. This seems like an amazing program. I'm a practicing artist as well as an educator.
So I view visual analysis from two different sides. I'm viewing it as I'm making art and as I'm researching art that I'm interested in, but I'm teaching that to my students and I teach right now at a community college and so I get such a diverse group of students. I get non-traditional students, people who have come back to college and are parents, and I get first time in a college atmosphere ever students.
So I find that to be really interesting. It makes the group dynamics invigorating. And I think that everybody here has a unique perspective that has value for the rest of the group.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk to you a little bit about my approach to visual analysis, and we're going to run through some different I guess different ways that our visual analysis is approached. We're going to do some practice analysis.
So we're going to look at three different artworks and we're going to practice and see what it feels like to do that. So I will let you know I'm going to share a PowerPoint. And when I do that, I'm not able to see any of you anymore.
So it feels a little bit like I'm just talking to a screen. So it is totally fine if you raise your hand. Perhaps Haver could just interrupt me and I will stop or just... If you have a question that needs to be asked or you need me to stop, I can absolutely do that, but I just can't see you.
So holler out into the void and I will stop because I can hear you. All right, let me... Share.
Can you see this?
Haiver | 04:48
Yes, I can.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 04:49
See. Yes, great. Okay.
So I'm Cheyenne Rudolph. I'm a multimedia artist, a filmmaker and an educator. And this is one of my works from the past like five years. It's a fashion display. And I sewed the whole costume and then made a fake baguette, a six foot long baguette.
So I do a little bit of sculpture, some interactive and performative work. And so I have a range of interests.
So today we're going to talk about visual analysis, which is called critique and critique can incite fear and tremors in people. I myself had some terrible experiences with critique in undergrad where It's a badge of honor to leave crying and in tears. But I've learned from that it's not the kind of teaching that I want to do. I want to inspire and I want to awaken awareness in my students.
So I realized that it. Can make you feel vulnerable or intimidated, but that's not my goal with this.
So I'm going to show you one of my favorite critics, art critics. His name is Jerry Saltz, and I'll let him tell you a little bit about how to talk about art.
Jerry Saltz | 06:10
Talk about art the way you talk about.
Haiver | 06:12
Everything.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 06:12
I just want to make sure everybody can hear that.
Haiver | 06:17
I can hear it. Yes, I get some thumbs up.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 06:19
Okay, great.
Jerry Saltz | 06:21
Talk about art the way you talk about everything. Don't try to talk like a pointy-headed intellectual academic. Write the way you talk the way you think. Hi, my name's Jerry Saltz. I'm the senior art critic for New York Magazine and the author of the book, "How to Be an Artist." Let yourself be the Philistine that you are. I'm one, you're one, everybody's an artist because Creativity is a survival mechanism of our species. We would not have survived without it.
So trust me, trust yourself, it's there. Let's hear your stupid thoughts, then I'll share mine, then we'll gore each other to death. Abstract art can be really hard to look at. Ask yourself, how was this made? When was it made? What did other art look like at the time it was made? And how might this change the definition of art? Find other people that might be making things or trying to live more creatively like you. And commune with them. See as much as you can.
Look, keep looking, never stop looking. Then work. Get yourself to work, you big baby. Work! I want you to walk around in museums and galleries and ask yourself this question: What would I like about this work of art? If I were the kind of person that liked it, and suddenly a little list will start appearing of good qualities, bad qualities, the odd things, the weird things. You don't know this, but you're becoming an art historical critical genius. If you turn to the person next to you in any museum or gallery, ask them, What do you think of this? You will be shocked. At the amazing things you hear, then you will share with them Your thoughts, and they'll think you're a genius too. It'll be good. Minnie MacArthur's for everyone. If it's horizontal, it's probably something like a landscape. If it's vertical, it's probably something like a portrait. And A bonus? Everything is a little bit figurative. Even when it seems like it's not. It's in there.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 09:17
Okay, my absolute favorite thing that he says is to ask yourself when you're looking at art, what would I like about this art if I was the kind of person who liked it? And I've think that this has so much value about perspective. Because if you're looking at any artwork, It was liked at one time by one person, at least the person who made it. Now, they may not like it anymore, but there are people who like it even if we don't. And so when we let that guard down and let those defenses down, we're able to approach it with a little bit more objectivity. Okay, and fun fact, Jerry Saltz used to be a long haul truck driver.
So he drove a semi truck for about ten years. When he quit making art, he says that he failed at being an artist. And so he just drove a semi truck across the country for a decade.
And then now he's a writer and a critic. So fun fact. All right, so we are gonna look at the Feldman method of criticism. That was the wrong Feldman. That was Corey Feldman. But this is the Feldman that we're going to talk about today. He wrote out these steps for how to do art criticism. And the very first step is foundational. It is describe. Describe. Describe what you see. And when you describe, you are stating the obvious. And it can feel a little bit strange because we don't always state the obvious. But if you don't describe exactly what you see in a way that someone who's not looking at the art could visualize it, then you don't have a good foundation. Your foundation is not objective.
So we describe first. And then we analyze and the analysis is looking at the relationship of the things that we have described, the facts that are there. And we'll use elements of art and principles of design, which I'll go over in just a minute.
So after we analyze, then we can go to interpret. So what are these relationships or associations mean for the artwork or mean for our how we view this artwork or what meaning that we derive from it?
And then the very last step of this four step process is evaluate. You'll see it called judge. But that's looking at. Value. Is the artwork doing what it is intending to do based on the facts that we've described, the analysis and the interpretation?
So we're going to practice the first three steps and then I'm going to talk to you a little bit about some of the things that might get in the way of giving a proper evaluation. So here are some handouts that are going to be available for you that show you and tell you what the elements of art are and what the principles of design are. And some of you might be familiar with them. Basically, the elements of art are like the tools or the ingredients to make art with.
So we have color, we have line, Shape. Texture. Value, space. Form and time, which is not on here. But any artwork is going to be made up of any number of these elements. Not all, some will have more elements than others, but when we have an arrangement of a few of these elements or our ingredients, then we have principles of design.
So we're using those elements to affect a principle of design like contrast. Or emphasis, pattern or repetition, variety, proportion rhythm, movement, balance, harmony, and unity. This is your recipe.
So you could take two elements of art, line and value, and you can arrange them in a way to create emphasis or to create movement. So most works of art will have multiple elements and multiple principles of design, and all of those are formal. We call those formal because they're related to the form that the art takes, what it looks like. Those tell us a little bit about the content or the meaning, the concept. But visual analysis will always start with form. What are the facts? What is the foundation? What are the materials?
And then we move into meaning. So we're going to see how this is. Done. We're going to look at work of art by Faith Ringgold and I The MoMA has on their website In part of their collection, they have visual descriptions of a lot of their artworks. And so this is part of a series of works where you can look at the work of art on the museum website, and then you can hear someone describing what's happening, describing the visual characteristics. I will say that this painting is quite graphic. It's visceral, it can be difficult to look at, and that is part of the intent of the artist. It is very thorough so I'm gonna play this while we're looking at the painting and I want you all to think about what am I seeing here and What a fact. Does what I'm seeing have on how I feel about what I'm looking at and what that might mean? And how did the artist feel about this arrangement, about putting these things here? Okay, bear with me as I...
MoMA Curator | 16:08
The artist Faith Ringgold painted American...
Cheyenne Rudolph | 16:11
Are we good? Can we hear that?
Haiver | 16:15
Yep.
MoMA Curator | 16:16
People series number 20, Die. In 1967, using oil paint on canvas, The work consists of two panels that form a continuous image. Together the panels measure 6 feet high and 12 feet wide. In metric units, this is about 183 centimeters high. And 366 centimeters wide. This painting depicts 13 men, women, and children in the midst of a frenzied and violent battle. Ringgold made this painting to capture the race and class struggles in the United States at the time. ...creating what she describes as an abstraction of what the fights were really all about. The artists arranged these figures against a checkerboard of 18 light and dark grey squares to look like a sidewalk viewed from above. 10 adults and 3 small children.
Some black, some white. Lunge, tumble, fall, huddle, and splay across the sidewalk. Which is spattered with blood. All of the figures wear expressions of shock, horror, or pain.
Some of their facial details are outlined in bright blue lines. Dark red blotches of blood model the clothes and faces of each figure except two. A pair of small children who huddled together closely near the center of the campus. The figures are painted using mostly flat planes of color. Making them appear like paper cutouts piled on top of the background. The lack of shadows enhances their two-dimensional quality. With few distinguishing features to differentiate them. The adults appear as the same four figures repeated in different poses. A black man, a white man, a black woman, and a white woman. The male figures are dressed identically in white dress shirts with light blue contours. Black pants, gray socks, and black shoes. The female figures wear short-sleeved, form-fitting mini dresses in orange. The black figures have brown skin, brown eyes, and black hair. And the white figures have pink skin. Blue eyes, and bright yellow hair. In the chaos of overlapping bodies and arms, it is unclear which people are perpetrators of the violence and which are victims. Let's explore the two panels in more detail. Beginning with the canvas on the right. On the right side of the canvas and near the top corner. A white man and black man are entangled. Blood staining their heads, faces, and shirts. The white man's head hangs limply above his right shoulder. His right arm extends outward. Pointing a black pistol toward a white woman at the center of the canvas. His left arm wraps around the shoulder of a black man. Who sprawls out in front of him. The black man's knees are bent, as if attempting to ground himself. His left arm is gripped by the white man. But his right arm stretches out holding an upturned knife with a blood-covered silver blade and black handle. From the right side of the frame. A black woman lunges in front of this entangled pair. Her right leg is bent, and her left leg kicks out behind her, cropped by the edge of the canvas. With both arms outstretched in front of her. She seems to reach toward a second black man who lies wounded on the ground. He grips his head with both hands. Gazing at us with dazed, bloodshot eyes. "Beside and just below the dazed black man are two barefoot children, sitting on the ground, clutching each other tightly." They appear to be miniature versions of the white male figures and black female figures, with similar outfits and hairstyles. The black girl sits on the lap of the white boy. Her knees folded up toward her chest. Both their faces bear the same horror as the adults. They are the only people in this scene not covered in blood. The figures we just described are located in the right-hand panel. Creating a continuous scene between the two panels, a white woman steps across the center of the painting and toward the right. Her head, torso, and the lower part of her right leg occupy the right hand panel. While her left leg and backside occupy the left-hand panel. Her hands are above her head and her fingers splayed as she towers over the frightened children. Her face is in profile, with wide eyes and a gaping mouth. She looks directly down the barrel of a gun. Pointed just inches away from her face by the white man at the painting's top right corner. Drops of blood spray her dress. And its sheer fabric reveals her pink buttocks. Her feet are set wide apart.
So her legs form an upside-down V. She wears a black low-heeled pump on her right foot. And her other foot is bare. In the area of sidewalk between her feet. A white man lies injured, with his blood-soaked head toward the bottom of the canvas. Streaks of red outline his yellow hair and mark the contours of his face. His limbs are splayed out, weaving beneath and between several of the other figures. Behind the white woman and man we just described A black man and white man tackle each other in a similar way to the first pair we discussed. The white man appears to lie on the ground, arms and legs outstretched. The black man is behind or beneath him, wrapping his left arm around the white man's ribcage and his right arm around the man's neck. Neither man appears to hold a weapon. But both are bloodstained and disheveled. To the left of this entangled pair. A second white woman with eyes wide open and parted lips, leaps across the panel in profile.
Though facing the opposite direction, her pose mirrors that of the first white woman, with her right foot forward and her body bent slightly at the hips. Her back foot seems like it is about to kick or trip over the head of the injured white man beneath her. In her outstretched arms, she holds up a small child with light skin and curly brown hair, gripping her head. The girl wears a short white dress and is barefoot and bleeding from her head. Her pose is similar to that of the woman holding her. Directly across from the small child, a black man disappears beyond the left edge of the canvas. The only parts of his body that are visible are his left leg, his left arm, and his right heel. His blood-stained white shirt is rolled up to his elbow, revealing a long red gash above his wrist. Now let's hear from the artist about this work.
Speaker 5 | 22:57
Hello. My name is Faith Wingold. And we're looking at my work, "American People Series Number 20," Die. Painted in 1967. There was a lot of spontaneous Rioting. And... Fighting in the street and undocumented killings of and great racism. Everybody knew. Everybody talked about it. But I would never see anything about it. On Television. Nothing. How could I? As an African-American woman artist, document what was happening all around me. I want to show a kind of abstraction of what the fights were really all about. And they had a lot to do with race? And class. And no one was left out. It was to make sure that certain people On the bottom. Don't get to the top.
So you can see they're all dressed in business suits and they're all hooty-dooty, but they're fighting for their Position in life in America. To be retained.
And then there's people who have already attacked somebody and they're trying to beat them down. And then there's people looking for somebody. Running after each other and screaming and carrying on. Against that background. And those squares really represent the sidewalk. Which basically was always the background of a riot. Because everybody's gonna fall on the ground. Having women with children there was very important. Because women are going to protect their children no matter what. These children, they're in the center. They gravitate toward each other. They don't know each other. But they're gonna try to help each other. They are the innocent victims here. I had the courage to go ahead and speak out. I want you to be upset. You're not supposed to see people rioting and killing each other, or even know that they're hating each other. Without being upset? This was going on then. It's happening again now. And every time I see one of those big riots in the street here today, I think back to die.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 25:27
Okay. Thank you for paying attention to that. I realize that it's a lot of information. The descriptions are thorough. They go into great detail. I love that we get to hear from the artist. We get to hear the way that she speaks about the work, to call them dressed as hoity-toity people, and to say you're not supposed to enjoy this, you're not supposed to want to see this, but it's important to depict it. I want to point out that during the main part of the description, before we heard from Ringgold, that it is primarily describe and analyze. There was almost no interpretation until we heard from the artist. There is a description about the materials, the size, The composition and the use of space, where are these figures located, how are they rendered, all of that provides a very thorough sort of concrete foundation, where then we can go into interpretation and evaluation... I will note that while they didn't talk about this, it falls under interpretation and evaluation, but this work is modeled after Pablo Picasso's Guernica painting in terms of style. Composition and content. It is a protest piece against institutional violence.
So we get into that in my copying lecture later on in the year. So that's Sort of what we're going for when we do visual analysis is we pay a lot of attention to what's happening in front of us visually. Before we move on and actually do this together, I do want to know if there are any questions or comments or feedback at this point.
Haiver | 27:43
I should chime in here and just add that one of the reasons we've started with visual analysis, which may be familiar for some and less familiar for others. Is this is what we're going to practice ourselves as a group in the coming weeks. We're going to do this on Sunday for our next activity is a close looking activity, looking at Jen and Kevin McCoy, our visiting artists in residence work before they come in and talk to us. And it's essentially what we're doing in our feedback sessions in our cohorts throughout the year. We are visually analyzing And I find as adults, we're very quick to jump past the describe and analyze phase and immediately jump to the interpret and the evaluate phase. And so I'm really excited for us to practice, like to start with this very just foundational piece, because we're I find as adults we don't necessarily, we're not very practiced at seeing. And long seeing. My experience of what we just listened to was Like, an evolving relationship to this painting over time.
Like, why did we start talking about the figures on the right before we talked about the figures on the left, when usually we read images from left to right? Is the figure that is cut off on the left side of the frame like the most important thing in here now? It is to me. It's the great point of mystery about maybe the resolution of the action from the weapons on the right to the figures now fleeing and running to something. I don't know what. To it. I find that listening to other people describe and analyze is a really incredible moment, to make space for us ourselves to see in new ways and get outside of our own heads.
So I'm just excited for us to practice that. So that's just a little bracket here to frame why we're starting here. But yes, I'd love to turn back to Cheyenne and make sure that if you have questions or thoughts at this stage that we make space for that.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 29:44
Thanks, Haver. That was great. And when you talked about just recognizing where they started the description on the right side to the left, I want to say that whatever your first thing that you notice is, it's not... Necessarily wrong. That's information for yourself. I noticed this first.
Someone else noticed something else first. So that kind of clues you into, what you might need more practice with observing and what tends to be the thing that you pick up on first. The fact that the figure on the left is cut off, sort of creates this expanding narrative that we're just seeing a little piece of this, but it continues outside of the frame in much the same way is the way that I would read that. And thinking about how Ringgold has framed it as sort of escalating obstacles. But yeah, are there other notes or observations before we move on.
Speaker 6 | 31:03
I have a kind of roundabout question about like just the analysis phase. So one thing we didn't really talk about is like how this painting was made or the process. And I'm wondering if that is worthy of documenting during the analysis phase.
So let's say the artist painted this with one hand tied behind their back, et cetera. Does that matter? Should we be Thinking about that when we present our own work or when we analyze work, or is it sort of irrelevant in terms of what the final result is?
Cheyenne Rudolph | 31:35
What is your name?
Speaker 6 | 31:37
I'm James.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 31:37
Merrill. James, what do you think? Do you think that materials or methods or techniques like a self-imposed limitation, do you think that is important to know?
Speaker 6 | 31:51
I think I'm probably a little over excited to share that and it could detract from the meaning of the work. So I think it's easy to talk about that and talk at length about that. And I question whether that is really that important or not.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 32:09
I think that's a great point. As a maker, if you feel like the methodology that you're using to create the work is important enough for you to be excited enough to share it, then It's part of your approach to making. It's context outside of the physical object. But when we get into visual analysis, we don't analyze in a vacuum. We're constantly being fed information that gives us associations to things.
So a work of art is not going to hold one static meaning all the time. It changes based on time period and culture and how the viewer changes too.
So it might be a side note, the limitations of the technique, it might be a side note to someone, but someone else might feel like it's really relevant. Does that make sense?
Speaker 6 | 33:12
I think it does, yes. Thank you.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 33:14
Yeah, but certainly material and technique can be a way that we interpret the work. And I think we'll look at some examples where that becomes part of the concept, the labor of making. Anything else?
All right, so we're going to practice. I'm going to run through the steps before I pull us out of the PowerPoint and we're going to go to a whiteboard where we can all sort of add our observations to a shared document.
So the work that we're going to look at is representational. It falls under realism or a painting. It is by Henry Osawa Tanner. It was painted in 1893. He was an American artist who did a lot of his training in France. The title of this artwork is called The Banjo Lesson.
So all of that information that I'm giving you is part of the title card or the title information that you will find with the majority of artworks, especially if they are part of the institution or the academy. Where we'll find it in a museum or a gallery or a textbook, spaces where we're provided that information. But that information clues us into a bigger context about how to read the artwork. It gives us a time period. It gives us the title information can be like this is how you're supposed to interpret it. The size of it tells us a little bit about its relationship to our own human scale.
So. Running through the very first step. You will describe what you see in the artwork. You will state the obvious. It will feel ridiculous, but that's where you start. You're going to describe exactly what you see. Where you see it in enough detail that if someone wasn't looking at it, had their eyes closed, they could visualize it pretty accurately in their mind.
So examples would be a red cat, two figures, a doll in the corner, gray squares in a line. We're looking at the form that the artwork takes.
So this is where your elements of art come into play. Is there light or dark value? Is there texture? , in the artwork. And this is where we can talk about it appears to be a painting. We won't necessarily talk about the method or the technique of how it's painted. That comes in analysis.
So now we're going to look at how does the artist visually organize it? This is the composition.
So the description of Faith Ringgold's painting Die, they talked a lot about the composition. They sort of walked us through where things were in space in that frame. Is there a foreground, middle ground, background? If so, what's there? What occupies those spaces? Are there colors? Are they arranged in a way that activates other colors or draws attention to?
So this might be colors used to create emphasis. That's a principle of design. What are the relationships between shapes? The word arranged is listed a lot here because the arrangement tells us a little bit more information about the composition and what's prominent, what's important, and what's its relationship to other things. Are there contrast pattern? What's the sense of space?
And then special techniques. So... Is it smoothly rendered? Are there lots of brushstrokes? Things like that. Did the person make it with one hand tied behind their back? And we know that because it's in the title card information, stuff like that.
And then Interpret. Well, why would they tie their hand behind their back to make this work? They created a limitation that interfered with or supported something else in the work.
So again, the relationship between all of these facts that you have. What is significant? About all of these elements and principles within the work? What is important? What are your associations? And associations are, somewhat subjective, but they're cultural, they're religious, they're based on your age and the type of person you are and what experiences you have.
So for instance, colors especially can communicate a lot emotionally and people can have certain associations with color in terms of how like a red color might make them feel warm, but it might make them feel angry. But in a different culture, it might mean something else.
So we bring in a lot of our own personal experience into the interpretation part. And as long as you are building your interpretation off of the evidence that you collected in describe and analyze in those first two steps, then the interpretation stands as long as you can support it. Can you pick up on a theme? Or is there a specific mood or feeling or tone that's being conveyed? And if so, what is it? And how do you know that? Once you can get like a pretty solid interpretation, Then you can evaluate. But we are not going to evaluate yet because we need to practice those first three steps and make sure we have a really solid foundation.
Like we mentioned earlier, it can be very easy to just have a gut reaction and decide and evaluate a work of art, whether it meets our standards. And so we're going to talk a little bit about that. How to recognize our own biases after we've done the first three steps.
So? We're gonna... Go into, I'm going to share. Hey everyone, I can see you again. I'm going to share a whiteboard and the whiteboard is interactive.
So it has our artwork and it has the four steps. We're going to do the first three, but we're going to do them sequentially.
So we will all work on describe first. And I think that everyone has access to be able to type into it. But if not, then I think we'll just take turns saying what we want and I'll type it in there. Here it is. All right, can everyone see this? I see all of your little... Everyone has a different color. Okay.
So I think you can zoom in. And I think you can probably see when I move things around. Is that correct?
Haiver | 41:29
Yes. So you can, if you're on a trackpad, you can pinch to zoom in and out on this. You can use two fingers to scroll side to side as well if you're on a trackpad. If you're using a mouse, You use your scroll wheel to zoom in and out.
And then to move about you want to hold down the right Click. And then you can drag. About to move that way.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 42:01
So. I think, yeah.
So we have a little box here that says describe and describe is state the obvious. I think someone deleted our painting. There it is. Okay.
So, Before we describe or as we're describing, we're looking very closely. And not making judgments.
So what are some facts that you see. That we can put into our little box here. And I'm happy to be the typist. I see someone typing. Impressionist.
So is that... A description or is that an analysis?
Speaker 7 | 43:05
Excuse me, but I'm just seeing colored rectangles happening on the screen. Is that what we're... .,,,,
Cheyenne Rudolph | 43:15
Paintings? Two figures. Do you see that? If you move your screen over, To the left, there's a painting. It's vertically oriented.
And then there are four squares and some text that says describe above the first square. Do you see that?
Speaker 7 | 43:36
No, I'm literally seeing The green rectangle is... Purple rectangle. An orange one. Maybe someone in the chat knows what It's not like what Silo as art is showing me at all. Okay, I'm going to drop it in the chat. See y'all. Right. There we go.
Sorry.
Haiver | 44:06
Is anyone in addition to Peter having trouble seeing the artwork?
Cheyenne Rudolph | 44:15
All good. I'm all good. It should be in the chat now too.
So I think you can... Pull that up and it will be a JPEG on your computer. And so you can see that and then we can work in the chat or in the, sorry, the whiteboard.
Haiver | 44:35
In response to Thomas's question here in the chat, the way to write, I believe, is to choose the text tool, which is in the toolbar in the far left side. Bye-bye. If you click that, you'll be able to click and add in your own box.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 44:54
Thank you. Okay.
Okay. Appears to be kitchen or a room daytime wooden floor okay wooden floor is great description Older black man, young black boy, So I'm seeing some language that says seems like. Seems like might be more of an analysis. Or an interpretation.
So we want to take a step back from the seems like and go, why am I making that assumption? What is telling me that it seems like this? And is there something more just factual description that could replace that or be the starting point for that. Right spot behind the figures. Okay. Light areas and dark areas. Okay.
Brushstrokes. Okay. I'm going to read these while you're still typing. Impressionist brushstrokes is an analysis. Impressionist means something. It's a category of labeling and describing. If we were to back away from that, what makes it impressionist, the brushstrokes? It's the quality of the paint and the quality of that method.
So we could say, that the surface has texture. Family Se Yes, on the surface it seems like a family scene and that is...
Likely fact. But how do we know it's family? What are we seeing that tells us family?
So family is... Interpretation, right? Because there are clues there that tell us that it's family and those clues are cultural and based on where we are in our lives.
So family could mean a lot of different things. So we want to say, well, we have family. An older figure and a younger figure. And there's something about how these two are interacting that cues us in that this is a family, right?
So that's not part of description. What else? Okay. Natural lighting. Two figures, light and dark shadows, natural color. One figure is a young black boy The second figure is an older black man. I The young black boy is sitting on the older black man's lap. The older black man is holding an instrument with the young black boy. The figures are slightly centered in the scene. The setting is in a room with a wooden floor and small objects. Okay? That's all description. That's all fact. Those things are there... And there's not really any opinions related to it. The boy is holding a banjo. The older man appears to be teaching him how to play. What about it makes it appear that way?
So the boy, where are the boy's eyes looking? They're looking. At his hand and the man's eyes are looking at the boy's hand.
So they're both focusing their eyeline right where, this banjo lesson is happening. And we know it's a banjo lesson because the artist told us this is the banjo lesson. That's what I'm titling it. And so we can infer that from it without, having to justify it. So their eyes are pointed down at the hands.
So that gives us a little bit of intimacy. That might clue us in that this is a familial situation. Okay, so there's a hat. And a pan and other household items on the floor. Okay, great. White hair and beard, Worn shoes. Does that mean the shoes are... Worn out, He's assisting the boy. Okay. Dad teaches his child to play a musical instrument sitting in the guest room. It seems a little bit messy. Okay. We're going to talk about that over on Analyze. Okay, deep contrast to light sources. Pots and pans on the floor. Okay. Portraits on the wall. Okay, now we're seeing stuff that's happening in the space that's telling us about the space because that space is important. It's... Put there intentionally by the artist. Nothing is there by accident. Everything was a choice with paint and a paintbrush. It is meant to be there. That doesn't mean that it's always the primary focus, but it's there for a reason. Okay, so I think we have some good facts here.
So now we can move over to analyze. Analyze is going to help us figure out what some of this stuff means. Not in like a full interpretation, but how does it help us get a clearer picture?
So if I'm analyzing this, I would say, Well, it does appear that there are two light sources. There's some warm light and then there's some cool light.
So... Two light sources are they possibly different sources of light or same light maybe not because they're different colors of light.. The light. On the back wall. Where is it? This one's tiny. Let's see what that says. Frying pan.
All right, so we all notice that there's stuff on the floor. OK, let's type into analysis. Are there questions about like what types of things to put in your analysis.
Speaker 8 | 52:28
Yeah, hi. Is it possible to see the slide again that had the analysis stuff on it I don't know if it's like a whole faff to switch back over to that.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 52:41
Do you mean the one that has... The steps.
Speaker 8 | 52:46
Yeah, I feel like they had a dark background, no.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 52:49
I think. I No, it's okay.
Haiver | 52:50
Would think it would kick us all out, but I took notes.
Speaker 8 | 52:54
Okay.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 52:56
I'm going to...
Haiver | 52:59
There you go.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 53:00
Copy and paste it or maybe you taste gonna work okay it did it all in the white font so hold up.
Speaker 8 | 53:01
Can yeah screenshot it and put it in here.
I see it. Yeah, cool. Thank you.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 53:24
Trying to Copy it. Highlight the font.
Speaker 8 | 53:50
I wonder if you can draw a rectangle like behind it.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 53:54
That's a good idea. Yeah, because I'm not...
Speaker 8 | 53:57
But I wasn't sure about what order things would chart into.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 54:03
Look at that. If anyone else can... It's not letting me... Select it.
Speaker 8 | 54:27
Sorry.
Haiver | 54:28
- All right.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 54:30
I think maybe, yeah, there we go. Oops.
Haiver | 54:35
That was me. I'm going.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 54:36
To stop touching it. Okay.
Speaker 8 | 54:40
Thank you.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 54:41
Yeah, that is analyze. So how are those things organized in the composition.
Like, We have two figures. This is a painting. It's realism. And so most of it is representational. There's not a lot of abstraction happening.
So it's all pretty proportional, right? Let's see what, okay. Open door during daylight hours or a fireplace. Great guesses. It seems to be a one-room home. Okay. I'm going to drag that one over to interpret. Objects in the front, characters in the mid ground and background of house interior. Yes. That is what. How it is arranged. You They might be family thinking of how the kid is sitting on the lap of the old man. Correct. That's an intimate place to be. We don't sit on anybody's lap, even if they're giving us a banjo lesson. There's... An intimacy and a trust that has to exist and that exists with family members or apparently with these two figures.
So that is excellent.
One brighter highlighting the shadows on the back wall. Okay. Time of rest as opposed to a time of work. That's an interesting interpretation.
So I'm going to move that.
The dwelling doesn't have electricity. Can someone tell me Why?
Speaker 9 | 57:15
Wasn't this painted in like 18 something? Yeah.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 57:19
Yes. It was painted in 18 something, 18... 93. Okay. Did we not have electricity then?
Speaker 9 | 57:32
That was my follow-up question.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 57:34
I mean, this family would...
Haiver | 57:36
Electricity then.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 57:37
Okay. Why wouldn't this family have electricity?
Haiver | 57:42
And we haven't gotten to a trigger yet, but they seem... By the modest means.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 57:47
Okay, yeah, so you're right. That is an interpretation. Do we have enough facts in describe and analyze to jump to that interpretation? Yes.
Speaker 5 | 57:59
Can everybody hear me??
Cheyenne Rudolph | 58:06
Didn't hear that what was that?
Speaker 5 | 58:09
Okay, ... I feel that there is no electricity because it depicts ... A post-it.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 58:20
It's depicting what?
Speaker 5 | 58:22
They post it. They... - There are pop-ups right now. Revelation of poverty like they don't have all the basic necessities they need all they have is hope.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 58:34
Okay, how do we know that they are... Poor. I.
Speaker 11 | 58:41
Would say that the older men's clothes look kind of wrinkled and they look kind of rough and all the stuff on the floor, I think you're probably... You know, poor, you don't have any place to put those things.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 59:01
Time.
Speaker 5 | 59:02
Yeah, because the boring question, who is playing, I don't know what to call it, sorry. I've been having network issues. The boy is not wearing a shoe and I think this is the combined two rooms in this painting. The reflection and the happens to be a product of their hope, their... Their aspirations. Then the light in the room is all they have and it's like ...
Like from the ceiling, it's coming from the right-hand side into their room. That's all they have. And they're just playing for their hopes and their hopes is what is revealed behind them. A life of provision.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 59:44
I love the use of this word hope, especially for this artwork. And you're sensing or seeing that hope visually documented by the use of light is what I'm hearing.
Speaker 5 | 59:58
Yes.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 59:58
Yes. That's an excellent interpretation or even evaluation. And I think we're probably ready for interpretation.
So we have some evidence that, You said that it looks like this one room is functioning as two rooms. And someone else mentioned maybe it's a one room space. There's a lack of shoes. That could indicate that there's a level of comfort in the space.
So when we're in our home, we disrobe to various levels. We don't wear shoes in the house or we're just a little bit more comfortable. I want to make sure that I'm getting everybody's... Comments here. Dramatic light and shadow. Okay.
So someone says the pair is centered in the frame as the main object of attention with few other objects claiming attention. So what is drawing our eyes to them?
Speaker 11 | 01:01:08
If There's almost like a spotlight there. There's a kind of glow of light around them.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:01:15
- Are they in the light?
Speaker 5 | 01:01:27
Yes, okay. They are in the light and not all are in the light. They are like... Should I call them the thoughts or feelings? If you can hear me. Okay. Yes, they are both in the light, both light and shade brought them out.
So they... But they are not the major they don't carry the major ... Story, but they are in the ... In the work.
So they are not competing with the main reference.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:01:54
Okay, so there is light around them. It's a different light than the light in the background. Is that what I'm hearing?
Speaker 5 | 01:02:02
Yes.
Speaker 11 | 01:02:04
They're the closest thing to the viewer, it seems like. There's nothing else in front of them.
You know, right out in front.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:02:14
Yeah, that's great. It's there. They're close to us. They're not the brightest thing. In the work and we're typically conditioned to think that the thing in the spotlight is the thing we're supposed to look at. The thing that's the brightest or the most lit is the thing that our eye is drawn to. But here, the bright light is behind them. I heard someone's voice.
Speaker 9 | 01:02:38
Yeah, I was going to say... Bye. I respectfully disagree with the first assessment of them being kind of the highlighted central figure because I feel like the whole is kind of The central figure, if you will. I don't know how to. Put that in words, but like, My eye. Isn't immediately drawn to just them in this piece. I feel like there's other things that the artist is highlighting. To kind of bring importance to them. But with the lighting coming from multiple sources too, like, I feel like the composition as a whole works because of the addition of those elements. Other little objects like the jacket in the top left corner and the plates in the bottom, it almost adds to the strength of the composition.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:03:30
Formally? Are you saying formally like the lines and the shapes and the colors and the textures of those things?
Speaker 9 | 01:03:37
No, just like the objects themselves.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:03:39
The objects, okay. Yeah.
Yeah, it gives us a little more context about these figures and humans naturally want to relate to other humans, whether we're introverted or extroverted, we still have this desire for connection and understanding. These other objects function formally.
So the pan on the floor with the handle mirrors the shape of the banjo and the neck of the banjo. It's similarly shaped and oriented.
Someone else?
Speaker 12 | 01:04:15
I wanted to add that they're the focus because the details, even not everything is fully detailed. Like you can see in the back jacket, it's just we could assume that it's a jacket, but in the man's arm, the clothes, all the fabric, you could see the details, the wrinkles, you could see the hands of the boy playing the vanguards. It's more detailed than the background and everything else on the floor.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:04:39
That's excellent. So they're using the clarity of the definition to create emphasis where the light and the dark, that contrast is all the contrast is working, but that light and the dark is sort of against what we would typically see. Another thing of note about the light is if you look closely at the two faces, the boy has a very warm light across his face and even on his forehead there's a shining on his forehead and then the grandfather or the elder figure the light is much cooler toned but their faces are well lit enough that we can get a sense of who they are and I've read that the light that's hitting the boy's forehead sort of draws attention to this knowledge that he's gaining through this passing down. Okay, we've got some great work over here in the interpret.
So at this point we can look at additional context. 1893. Black man, black child. What do we know about that time period in America that can help us with our interpretation?
Speaker 11 | 01:06:19
This is like maybe A little bit past the reconstruction. Period.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:06:28
- So what's going on socially, politically? What is their world like? Because this is representational. This is a realism painting. Is there context that is important for us to know?
Speaker 11 | 01:06:50
Yes, there would be a difference between where geographically this is if it's in I don't know, the North or the South.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:07:00
Doesn't say. I do see someone in the chat says the end of slavery. They might be sharecroppers. Yes. They're quite positive sharecroppers.
Speaker 5 | 01:07:13
Okay, like for me, right? When I looked at the picture, I'm giving to the year, Within the 18th century and 19th century, when we started hearing things like the Black Revolution, started getting back their form of identity.
So that's why I spoke about the piece like, If we go back to the peace... What I'm seeing is when you look at the piece, the images are the background they are not really, they don't really correlate. That was why I spoke about hope. Now, what they have at the back and what we have in the front, they are not the major story. Because the light is really shown on the two figures. They are the major story. But now their major story is telling us the state of the background ".
I agree. Banjalo Now, all they have is that Banjilo and that is the source of their joy at that moment. And you can feel the bond between the father I call him father or grandfather, not really a father because that is like Because if you look at the state of the man and the boy, the age difference is really wide. And the painter has really captured that for us. We can see that is like a grandfather saying, telling the Sun, the state of the future in the Bangelo. And that is why that background at their back, does not correlate with what they have. You can't see this tip.
Yeah, that's my place.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:08:56
There's a contrast in the type of objects in the back as well as the lighting that draws attention to the differences. Yes. I think that's an excellent interpretation that we you could spend more time on. We do need to move on, but I did want to mention that, Images of black men with banjos was not unheard of during this time. They were typically stereotypical caricatures of a demeaning quality.
Sort of showing black men playing the banjo in this minstrel type of way that debased their intellect and sort of capitalized on them as caricatures who were there to entertain people. So This image here is a stark contrast to imagery that was very popular during this time of black men and banjos, but it does not feel, it does not have the tone of what was being produced during that time. And that is context that's pretty far removed from where we are now. This is Hundreds of years ago, we're not experiencing that the way that it was experienced when this painting was made and put forth in the world, but there was a movement of artists who were pushing back against that stereotype. And that would go into our interpretation. Now we're not going to do evaluate just yet. I'm going to pop us out of the whiteboard and Did I take us out of the whiteboard?
Haiver | 01:10:51
Not yet.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:10:53
Bye. All right. And we're going to go back to the PowerPoint.
Do you see what I see? Step four, evaluate.
Haiver | 01:11:13
Yep, we got you.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:11:14
Okay, great. So we're not going to evaluate yet. Because We don't necessarily have all of the steps and sometimes we can look at a work of art and believe in our gut. It's the most beautiful thing we've ever seen. And it's deserving of all the awards and the person next to us does not feel the same because we all have different experiences.
So within the Feldman method of criticism, we have theories that are outlined and these are formalist. Realist or called imitationalist, instrumentalist, and expressivist or emotionalist. And these are sort of umbrella terms for how you find value in artworks when you're looking at them.
So I'm going to go over briefly what these look like and then give a couple of examples of works that fall under that category. And I'm not saying that these are great examples of each theory, but they are works that have qualities that might " Someone who believes in formalism finds value in art when it masters the elements of art and principles of design. It is based in those ingredients and recipes.
So what form does it take? What does it look like? How is it made? And a good work of art in formalism will have exceptional qualities like line or color or composition. And that can be with or without a subject.
So homage to the square apparition. This might appeal to a formalist because it has control over formal elements of shape, and color and value. And it's symmetrical. There's the framing is very controlled. But you get formalists who is exploring something that's a little more wild. This is still a work that is about the form that it takes.
So it doesn't necessarily have to be precise in the edges and the lines, it can be exploring form through material. Imitationalism or realism? You believe that art is good when it imitates reality, specifically your reality. There's works that mimic or represent real life that can be photo realism, but it can be works that sort of give you a window into real life.
So proportions are important, perspective is important, realism is important. It's essentially a copy.
So we have this stunning painting titled 61 Pontiac 1968 to 1969 and it looks like a photograph, like a snapshot of a family standing in front of their car. It looks like a specific time. It is a painting though, it is not a photograph. This would qualify as an imitational work. This sculpture would qualify. It's hyper-realistic. It is made of stoneware clay and painted and it has sheep's wool for the hair. The manipulation of the material is so detailed that it looks like actual human skin and the rendering feels very precise in a specific type of way like this is a real person. The emotionalist or expressivist believes that art is good when it evokes an emotional response. It makes you feel something, it shows an emotion, and it transfers that emotion to you. , It can be any emotion, happy, sad, excited, fearful. Anything that has that quality of emotion.
So Jacob Lawrence's painting, Confrontation at the Bridge. This is a highly emotional visceral image. There's a scary fanged creature and there are lots of people quivering and pulling back.
And then the linear elements of the bridge and the sharp angles sort of pull those figures back. And then we have Kathy Colwitt's drawing, Woman with Dead Child. It is gestural, it is raw, it's visceral, and it is just value and line. But you get a sense of this grief that has become almost animalistic. It's showing an emotion and it pulls an emotion out of you.
And then the last theory is instrumentalism. Art is good when it communicates a message. That might be a political message, a social message, a moral message. Any sort of idea, a lot of political protest art would be instrumental.
So we have Nick Cave's Sound Suits.
Is to say.
Faith Ringgold | 01:17:50
You know, a sound suit... It's really a... Object that can be worn. And what that means is that it's this sort of object that is completely sort of made of a variety of materials, anywhere from twigs to bottle caps to pony beads and it's really sort of about me sort of creating this three-dimensional sort of cloth that conceals the body. And so for me, it operates as this form of protection.
So it hides gender, race, class, forcing you to look at it as something other. And it's really sort of speaks about movement dance in this sort of celebratory manner. Material has always been a language that I've used and so I'm always sort of invested in research and looking for new ways of making, incorporating new shapes, forms.
You know, I... Yeah, put Sansus on hiatus. At times and moved on. Of my development, but when I come back to them, I'm always coming back with a new point of view.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:19:14
So he's making the sound suits to disguise race, class, gender. So they become an instrument for that. Yoko Ono's cut piece was an interactive performance piece that is instrumental. It's communicating and challenging gender stereotypes and violence against women.
So In order to effectively judge, it is a good idea to have an awareness about which of these you value. And you might be one or two, but there's probably a hierarchy and that can shift throughout your lifetime. But That's something to think about, carry with you and check in about.
So that you recognize where your evaluation is coming from... All right, so we're gonna look at another work of art and we're gonna do this together. This is Jack Whitten's 9-11-01 piece. Here it is installed.
So it's a large scale mosaic. And the materials are acrylic, ash, blood, hair, and mixed media on canvas. And it was made in 2006. We're going to go to... The other white board.
All right, can you all see? The whiteboard.
Yeah. - Yep, okay.
So we're gonna describe I think I can. Well, in the materials. Again with the... gasp How did you change the color of the shape?
Haiver | 01:21:42
After I drew it, I could click on it and there was a color box.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:21:46
Bye.
There we go.
, " gives us information. The name of this is 9-11-01. Tiny Bricks. Are they bricks or do they look like bricks? Black pyramid with light background, great color accents. Lots of chaos. What does that mean? No aligned grid on the mosaic.
So are you talking about the background is, the grid is ordered and the pyramid mosaic is a different order. Angle Old to new.
Large dark triangle against a blue background. Messy at bottom. Okay. Great! Let's look at Analyze. If you look closely, I think you can zoom in pretty close. And see some other details.
A boot print, lots of boot prints. Chaos on the pyramid. Okay, so the arrangement of the tiles on the pyramid. Are chaotic. That's sort of an analysis, but I see what you mean. It's not ordered in the way that the background is ordered. Amorphous and round patterns. Okay. I think I see a single eye. Where is the eye?
Snakes.
I see. I think I can grab... Another image. Of detail image.
So here's the boot prints.
Right, so there's some more details. The textures arrangement of materials seem to clash. Depicting violence. Hi. The tones around the pyramid are earthy while the pyramid itself is dark. And ominous. Okay, so we see a contrast in the material, the technique, and some of the formal qualities. I will say that this is a mosaic of acrylic paint. Swatches sort of.
So the artist made these tiles or these mosaic pieces out of paper and ash and blood. And painted them and cut them out and then arranged them in a sort of orderly fashion for the background and then less so for this triangular shape. Then there's magazine cutouts, boot prints with words imprinted.
So one says daily news. Another one says remember your copy. Single eye. Colorful diagonals like a piece of building spire. I see some formalism here. We have one big black color and good balance between black pyramid. The snakes are in the areas that are painted. Okay, so there's a lot of like imagery stuff that we're picking up on that could lead us to an interpretation. Okay, so if we go down to interpret. What does that triangle symbolize, if anything?
Speaker 9 | 01:28:00
I don't know if this is necessarily related exactly to the triangle, but it seems like it's like shedding a layer. Almost like a snakeskin or something. That's like peeling off the bottom of the... Structure or Pyramid, whatever it may be.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:28:23
Okay. So it feels like there's a coming undone-ness about it. Okay.
I mean... That seems to track. Remember, what is the title? 9-11-01. Do we remember what is significant about that date?
Speaker 5 | 01:28:44
Yes. I was trying to ask a question. Yes.
Sorry, I don't know how to type, but you'll have seen my question. You are my, from the topic itself, the title rather 9-11 because the piece is already speaking a lot to me I was I zoomed in And yes, my question, you know, you spoke about impressionism, until I realized that it was a mosaic. Because I thought it was brushstrokes that he made them like squares. Then when I zoomed in and you said mosaic, then I said, wow.
So if someone says impressionism in this place, it won't stand, right? Without not necessarily saying because Would it be possible that he made his brushstrokes to be like rectangle, rectangular patterns to get it, it's not possible, right?
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:29:35
No, it is a mosaic. You're right.
So it is. He created each little, you can sort of see a little white outline around. Each of those is a separate piece.
So he sort of created a lot of pieces separately and then compiled them or assembled them together in this sort of collage. Does that answer the question?
Speaker 5 | 01:30:03
Yes, it does and I'm very grateful for that. It answered my question and wow, I'm very grateful. I don't think this is not really an interpretation. I just want to describe the work.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:30:17
- Sometimes that's all we do is, or all we are able to do is just describe and sometimes the rest of it comes later. You sit with that for a while. The description of Faith Ringgold's painting took 10 minutes and that was mostly describe.
So it It's, we're practicing here, to get a feel for like how each step leads into the next and to have an awareness that we don't jump straight to evaluate. But you're right. It comes sometimes later and as a practicing artist, you might all agree that sometimes you do a thing and then later you realize, okay. I see what I was doing there, or you can make connections later, based on an intuitive choice. So yeah, we're not going to look at a work of art and immediately be able to, sort of, do each step like quickly and have an evaluation at the end. And for me, evaluation, I sometimes just leave it off because, The first three give us enough of practice with being aware and observing things. And the judgment and the evaluation just comes naturally to us.
So we don't have to do that. I do want to say it's a little bit after four and I know that Haver our time is probably coming to an end.
Haiver | 01:31:55
That's true. Yeah. Okay.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:31:58
I do appreciate like how readily everyone jumped in to do this process. It's not like I'm needing you to fill out this form and be done and now you've done the assignment, but it's more about like, can you see yourself doing these steps in your practice anytime you're looking at artwork? Just... Describe what you see and ask yourself, what would I like about this if I was the type of person who liked it?
Haiver | 01:32:31
Yeah, I think one of the big questions that comes up here as we come to a close. So as the students come into their first close looking session activity discussion on Sunday, they'll come into it with very much with Feldman's list of describe, analyze, interpret and evaluate. And I think Personally, I think we have a good understanding of what describe means and to really get back to those base facts. And what I find is you're building up a list of facts so that when you get to the interpret stage, you're backing up what you're saying with something that you've already observed. You're backing up with evidence. And so the describe phase is the evidence phase. I think where people might run into confusion and could be good to clarify while we're still on here together is And in the analyze phase, I found a lot of the points made on the slide. And again, the slides will be available to everyone after this.
So if you didn't furiously write notes, you'll be able to see this again soon. They were questions about how does the artist visually organize the composition, questions about foreground, background, use of colors and shapes. A lot of that seemed like very formal, like the analyzing mostly about formal visual analysis. Is that accurate to say is that what's happening in the second step or are there additional things that should show up in there?
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:33:54
Yeah, if we're breaking it down, The first two steps are mostly formal and the last step is conceptual. If we don't have that evidence of what the artist is giving us visually, then we're just basing it on who knows what. We don't want to jump to conclusions about this means this because that's what it means in my world. We have to take into account who that artist is and what those symbols or formal elements mean to them.
So that's where I think we can bring in historical context. Like this was a black man painting post-Civil War and challenging stereotypical presentations of black men with banjos. - Yeah, to your point, I think interpret is really where you can sort of spring out some conceptual stuff.
Haiver | 01:34:58
Yeah, I think the issue I've experienced in my own education settings is sometimes it'll just be, I don't remember the difference between these first two steps because they're both formal analysis. Like, could you give in a sentence or two, just a really clear way for distinguishing what goes into each, into step one versus step two?
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:35:16
Yeah, absolutely. Describe is what do you see?
Yeah, and it's facts and concrete. Analyze is more like, More adjectives, I think.
Like, it's a large red bird. Behind or is this That's just a for instance that doesn't relate to anything we've looked at.
So I'll go back. Someone mentioned the shoes in the banjo player, that the shoes looked worn. That's an analysis because, we're sort of interpreting, but like, it's still surface. It's still formal. The man is wearing canvas shoes is described. " D interpret is I think he's probably poor and that's supported by the fact of who he is when he was.
And then evaluate his Is it effective? Is it not effective? But again, like a lot of times with students, I just leave out evaluate altogether because we already are born with our internal instincts and we already know how to judge. The evaluate is important if we're evaluating based on what we know the intention of the artist is. What are they trying to do? Did they do that?
Haiver | 01:36:51
Yeah, I really appreciate that helped a ton. Yeah, that's great.
Yeah, I was very much thinking about someone wrote early on in the first piece, like, It's a dad with his son. And what we start with, it's an older man and a young boy and we work forward from there. And that, you know, the dad part comes later or the grandfather part.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:37:10
Yeah, I think like you add more qualifiers each step. So you just start with almost no qualifiers. But I don't know, sometimes color is a qualifier, right? But Yeah, start simple and build on that. And I'm available on the chat. If anybody has questions about any of these steps that we went over, the PowerPoint will be shared as a PDF with links to all the videos.
So I'm happy if anybody wants to just... Get any more feedback or information. I love talking about this stuff and I'm so excited that you will get to practice it and your cohorts.
Haiver | 01:37:56
Yeah, just one second, Jessie. Hold on one sec. I just, because we're way over time and I want to make sure we're ending. No, we're good. This is good to, we're going to save the rest of the questions for the chat. And by the chat, I need to explain what that means.
So we keep adding new channels into the community app. As soon as we get off this call, you're going to see a notification pop up that you've been added to the art lecture discussions channel. And so we're gonna have one channel that set aside for our art discussions that includes art history, philosophy of art, our visiting artists and things like when Cheyenne comes and talks about cool things about craft and creativity and how we just think about what it means to be an artist.
So that channel is going to appear in a second. Any questions you have at this point, you can drop into there. She's going to be around over the next few days to respond to what's going on.
And then as our art history lecturer, Paulina Rudd, talks next week, we'll pivot to talking about what Dr. Rudd presented on at that point.
So that channel will just be an evolving part of that. And then when we get to business of art stuff, we'll have a second channel for all of our business of art discussions.
So that'll be in there. So I look forward to seeing you all in there. Again, plenty of time to keep talking in the chat, but Cheyenne, thank you so much for leading us into what it means to look at formal analysis and really I know we only talked on it for maybe 10, 15 minutes toward the end, but really touching on when we are evaluating a work and assessing our relationship to it and whether it's good per se, which I don't even like perhaps using that word, but does it connect with what my taste is to recognize what we're speaking out of? If I'm relating to Joseph Albers square paintings because I like color and I like shape and he just does it really interestingly or am I an emotionalist and I prefer to really connect with something on an emotional level first which is definitely how I work I'm like I toggle between the two and we can be more than one thing at the same time but it is I think really useful for us as we go into our cohort sessions in a couple weeks to know when we say we're connecting with something to know that we're saying it out of a position that we're already holding. And so. Thank you for giving us language, for being able to recognize our own position in doing that.
Cheyenne Rudolph | 01:40:14
Yeah, I think that it will transform your art practices.
Haiver | 01:40:19
Well, thank you again, everyone. Thank you for staying a few minutes late. We'll try to keep these more on time in the future. We'll see you in the app in a little bit. Jesse, I can't wait to hear what your question is in there, and we'll see you all soon. Have a good one all.