Speaker 1 | 00:00
Hey everyone, it's great to have you back with us. We are back today for our first conversation, our first interview with someone from the business side of art, from the art world, who is not one of our visiting artists or lecturers. And one of the things I really love about the way we designed Artist Commons is to really focus on guest speakers. It's one of the reasons that when you go to the Artist Commons website and see here's the list of people involved, right? It's me as director of the program, it's Laura as program administrator, it's Dr. Rebecca Millsap as our regular philosophy of art lecturer, and then it gets very thin after that. In the next six months, right, we'll start being able to add additional names of here's people who've come in as visiting artists to speak. Here are guest speakers that have come in. And we chose this approach of having guest speakers as the main focus rather than consistent faculty because we want people who are engaged in the practice of working in the art world, working alongside artists or institutions in various capacities. And we want to be able to make sure that you're getting knowledge that is recent, that is current to how the art world is functioning right now.
So I'm really pleased with those goals in mind to welcome our first guest speaker, who is Whitney Hart. Whitney is a collector and curator as well as a consultant to various cultural institutions as well as being a longtime friend. And so I'm excited to welcome her to the program. Thanks for being here, Whitney.
Speaker 2 | 01:37
Hello, thank you for having me.
Speaker 1 | 01:39
So I'm curious, you've collected a lot of work. We've done, I don't know what you would call it if you're a collector and someone dials in to do a Zoom with you. It's not a studio visit in quite the same way. It's a collection visit. What would you call it?
Speaker 2 | 01:56
I guess, yes, a collection tour. - Virtual collection time?
Speaker 1 | 02:01
When did you start collecting? Like, how did that come into your life?
Speaker 2 | 02:06
.. I feel like that's a how did I get into art question more generally, so this is my time to give my bio spiel, I guess. I... Grew up I grew up just outside New York City in a small town called Bronxville in Westchester and really grew up going into the city every weekend or every other weekend to go to museums. That was what I loved, dragging my parents on the train or in the car to go into the city and From there, I've always had an appreciation and a love of art. I was always really drawn to abstract expressionism and kind of post-war timeframe. And From there, I had to do art courses in high school and I did photography because I was not a very good drawer or painter. And my high school had a dark room in the basement, which I was very fortunate to have access to that whenever I wanted.
So really my introduction into art from a formal practical perspective was through black and white photography. And then I evolved into doing university color photography courses at the School of Visual Arts. Before I went to university due to the proximity. That was that.
I mean, that was how I came to love art. And as a result, I would always like buy things here and there that I enjoyed.
And then once I owned my own home and started collecting things. Originally, it was very much collecting things that had emotional relevance to places that I've been, things that I enjoyed.
And then over the course of time, particularly with digital art and NFTs that turned into purchasing more robustly and more broadly. And now I have a lot of work across Tezos and Ethereum.
Some of you might know I worked at Trilitech in London, which is one of the foremost. Companies within the Tezos ecosystem looking at advancing Tezos blockchain. I was the interim chief marketing officer for a year.
So as part of that, I started collecting a lot of work on Tezos to learn the ecosystem and to learn the artists in the community. And then after I spent a year in that role, I went to Ferrofile where I was the director of exhibitions and head of growth for a year.
So I oversaw six exhibitions while at Ferrell File, working closely with Casey, Sean, the curators and the artists for that year as well. So, That really lit the fire for my collecting within the digital art realm.
Speaker 1 | 05:11
I'm really fascinated by the number of people who come from photography first and end up finding their way into technology-based art, which is how I think of it these days, right? It's not just digital practice. It is many types. It's physical computing. It's robotics. It's science-based art.
So tech-based is where I've landed as a term. Do you have a theory for why that keeps happening?
Like I know half a dozen different people who've, I come from a photography background too, right? You can see my giant. In-Captain are behind me.
Speaker 2 | 05:46
.. Great question. Think if you started to experiment with art and technology and then I feel like that opens the doors to then wanting to explore more. And you're already exposed to the opportunities that technology can provide for artistic expression as opposed to, I think, some artists that come out of painting or sculpture backgrounds where I think their training is much more rigid into This is a canvas. This is paint. These are applications of Y onto X, I think that there's probably within that educational arc it's a bit more rigid. I think once you're exposed to the opportunities that technology provides, then start wanting to know more and more what else is there.
Speaker 1 | 06:47
Yeah, exactly. I feel like the path to lens-based art and to tech makes a lot of sense from a creator standpoint. Because you're already working with technology in various ways.
Speaker 2 | 07:02
I agree.
Speaker 1 | 07:03
JOHN MUELLER: Yeah. And as you've collected, what have you found holds your attention best over time?
Speaker 2 | 07:20
I found that there are definitely, well, There are works that I have purchased There are works that I've purchased that especially my early collecting that I did on Tezos. That I actually did not realize they were generative code. And I purchased them on FX hash, seeing the final output, not recognizing that they would move.
And then at various points when I was playing with the different Ferrofile technologies to get the artwork off of my phone or out of my wallet and onto my screen, I would put them up on the screen and then I realized that they were actually code. So that was a big facepalm moment and probably not something I should publicly admit, but safe space.
So I think that really made me re-explore my collection. Thinking about different ways of viewing it, hanging it, engaging with it, displaying it, made me really like deepen my appreciation and re-explore a lot of early works that I'd collected. Just looking at it and thinking, I like the final output. This is beautiful. This appeals to me. This resonates with something.
So I really enjoyed that and I think that's one of the things I really like about digital arts. Like I can take it from projector to a screen to a square screen to Bringing it to a friend's house and putting it on their television and living with it and experiencing it in so many different ways is really appeals to me and being able to rearrange my space to fit the mood or the vibe for the moment.
So I've enjoyed that... I find that what holds my attention over time? I think different days hold different things.
Like some days I just want to look at something really beautiful and other days I want something that's going to push me to think more introspectively. And that's very much dependent on all the different factors in my life of what's happening around me.
So I don't think that there's a, one size fits all answer to that question. I think that what holds my attention best comes down to what is the mood that day and what do I kind of need or want out of beauty that I've elected to surround me.
Speaker 1 | 10:04
Had you been collecting work before you came across the blockchain-based art space that you ended up in and working in for several years?
Speaker 2 | 10:14
Yes, I did. Particularly my husband's Mexican. And so we had a lot of what I would what people would probably deem to be artisan work from different like Mexican artisans all around the country.
So we have different collections of black pottery, alebrijes, things like this all around the house. And so it's kind of a combination of that sort of work and then I have always really liked work on paper. I really like the ability to see the artist's hand in the work and really foreground that relationship between artist-artist intent and the paper. I think it comes through more clearly with work on paper than painting in a lot of cases.
So I do have a lot of work on paper as well and then nfts or digital art was layered on top of that.
Speaker 1 | 11:13
How do you think about that relationship between the artist's hand when you come from drawing and as you move into the digital space? Like where does the artist's hand show up? Where does the aura, as Walter Benamy would say, of the art reside at that point?
Speaker 2 | 11:33
.. I think that's a great question. Trying to think more specifically of examples out of like Ferrofile.
Speaker 1 | 11:50
It's important to say here for anyone who is less familiar with the digital art space, Ferrofile is a digital art online platform that allowed people to, that curators were curating group shows of artists. It was co-founded in part by Casey Reese, who's an important creative coding person. Godfather of the space, grandfather, one of those. Legend, amazing artist in his own right. He teaches out in California at one of the art schools there where they have a degree specializing in this.
Yeah, big fan of Ferrofile and the work that you did while you were there.
Speaker 2 | 12:32
I think for me, I - Yeah. Where do you see the artist hand in coding?
I mean, I think that In the digital space, I don't think that there's a one, again, I don't think there's a one size fits all answer to that question, because I think it really varies if you're looking at generative algorithmic art or generative AI. I think in generative AI, where the artist's hand comes into play would probably be in training data selection and the prompting or coding that goes around it itself and that level of intention. And I think the same, I mean, I guess the same thing in Generative algorithmic code. It comes down to the writing, the prompting, the intention. The writing of the code and the intention that goes into that, the thoughtfulness that goes into that. And I think that there, You can tell when code has been rushed And it doesn't really feel... Particularly I think when there is When there isn't like a single... Cohesive body of work that is able to sit together and clearly have like relational strings between each other. To me, that's when you can start seeing like the artist's hand in the creation and curation of the outputs versus a lot of code thrown into a computer and there's like tons of outputs and it all feels a little bit disjointed.
Speaker 1 | 14:18
Yeah, absolutely. In a lot of ways, the artist becomes a selector, an editor. Becomes a big part of what their role is at that stage. And I mean, that's been true in art for over a century now, like photography made artists into selectors and editors first. And so it's fascinating to see that generative art has now done that as well, continued that tradition. It's a continuation and not some kind of rupture with what came before in art history. I have always thought for one of the big problems looking at art online like generative work is that it's difficult to tell the difference between a sketch and a finished piece.
You know it if you've looked at hundreds and hundreds of pieces, like, this is either immature work or it's unfinished work. But there is no, like, everything sits within the same frame on our desktop monitor or iPhone as we scroll through you know, our feed looking for new work to get excited about. And there's sometimes it's difficult to tell I wish there was some kind of signifier, some way of framing to say, this is a sketch. Whereas like it's very clear when something is a drawing sketch versus a finished painting.
Speaker 2 | 15:41
Yeah, I agree with that. I think that.. I think that in the case of moving image, whether and even that extends into like video games, it's easier to say like, here's a frame, here's a still, here's how the work evolved as I was crafting the video game and the world that surrounds it or as I was really working on. The different frames of the video, it's easier to then extrapolate, like to pull things out of that. And say like, here's a sketch, I think that when it comes to generative art or AI, like that's a much more, it's much hard.
Like I think the line is much more.
Speaker 1 | 16:35
Absolutely. - Would you say that you have the collector bug?
Like the need to own or to have?
Speaker 2 | 16:50
I don't know how to answer that question. Ever since last year, I've been really trying to be much more formal about my collecting and have been in the process of trying to create curatorial themes around like that create guardrails of things that I'm very interested in and that I really want to explore. One of those ideas is or one of those curatorial themes is really around memory, and this concept of like what does technology allow us to remember? Is it everything that we want to remember? What happens to memory when it's mediated by technology? And how does that change with different technologies from photography to generative algorithms to generative AI, like how does that evolve and take form in all these different places?
So... I definitely when I see work that like appeals to me within that frame. And I mean, that could include like, I go to an art fair, and see a painting or video or something that's not on the computer, which is most of my collecting at this point are things that I find on the computer and purchase through the blockchain. I definitely get the bug of like, I want that. I want that in my collection.
So I would say that I have the bug within these specific that I really want to collect in, but I try to be quite principled if not just like buying anything and everything because that That's financially not really possible. It leads to a proliferation of things that I don't have anywhere to put them.
Speaker 1 | 18:36
Fair. Yeah. Are those themes that you landed on, and I love this way of thinking about how to collect and why to collect at a given moment, are those themes things that emerged after you saw yourself collecting several works like that, or how did you come by those themes?
Speaker 2 | 18:51
It definitely turned into last year I went through a huge wallet reorganization process and put everything onto a ledger, which was horrible and very needed, but... The worst experience in the world. And I started seeing a lot of themes, started revisiting a lot of older work that I'd collected. And in that process started seeing like, as we're talking about like themes that come through, I think that as I got further along the path of working at Ferrofile and working with curators and I started thinking about my own collection as an opportunity for curation as well.
So I would say that the desire to collect through curatorial lenses evolved from multiple has avenues over the course of time, but it's something that I've really tried to stick within for let's say the last six to nine months.
Speaker 1 | 20:02
It's been a long time to be disciplined. I appreciate that quite a bit. This is the most we've talked about blockchain in the program up to this point.
So forgive me for defining a couple terms as we go here. So a wallet would be a place in which people store and hold both the financial objects by which they buy art, as well as the art itself, which is a type of, they would call it a token. And a ledger is a hardware device that helps create security so you don't get your work stolen, which, you know, in an infinitely digital playing field feels important to have.
So I'm curious, I know you've been going through a rehang of your house recently. You mentioned this reorganization of your wallet and setting up ledgers. Are there pieces that you had on your walls for a long time that as you're reassessing what you want to have up, you've regretted collecting? Or what does it mean for your relationship with the work to change? Over time or what does it mean to grow out of a work.
Speaker 2 | 21:07
Yes, I'm actually rehanging the walls behind me. So that's why one of them is blank and the panda is going to move. I have been rehanging my house and significantly changing what is around me. And I have never regretted buying anything or... Having things framed and living with them. Perhaps I just don't own enough things, but I've never regretted any of what I've purchased. But I do feel that you hit a point where you kind of outgrow something. For example, like, you know, I have works that were purchased 10 or 15 years ago and now my interests have gone in an entirely new direction over the last five years. And so what I collected 10, 15 years ago just feels less relevant. I think I'm someone who gets very sentimentally, emotionally attached to these objects. And so for me, it's like, I don't want to part with them. But I will say that my guest bedroom in my house has become a hodgepodge of all sorts of stuff because that's where all the things go and get hung that don't have a place anymore.
Speaker 1 | 22:29
That was my next question is like, what do you do with work when your relationship to it changes? Like, what responsibility do you have to it as a collector to... Have it up or to make sure it finds a new home?
Like, how are you navigating that?
Speaker 2 | 22:44
.. As I said, the guest bedroom becomes a hodgepodge of things. But...
I mean, for me, it's like I will either like bubble wrap it and put it into a closet and keep it safe and put it away or just hang it in a different place in the home. You know, I think that there are things, as I said, though, I, for me, the things that I've purchased historically over the course of time have been purchased generally because they have some sort of emotional significance.
Like either I was traveling or, and I purchased something on that trip. You know, I saw something and it really resonated. Maybe it connected a memory of here and to the work from there.
So it's not necessarily things I want to get rid of. It's just maybe things that don't fit within how I'm feeling at this moment and what I'm wanting be surrounded by at this moment. And so I think in the same way that I talk about organizing the ledger, making sure all the works are safe on this, third party piece of hardware connecting to software.
You know, is I think it's the same thing for the home, is making sure that it's sort of bubble wrapped or put in a box or, you know, cared for effectively. Put into a closet. Not exposed to extreme light conditions or anything that would damage it over the course of time.
You know, this sort of thing is where I'm thinking about it if I don't have a place to physically display it any longer...
Speaker 1 | 24:25
Are you ever reselling any of the physical pieces? Are you looking for homes for things?
Speaker 2 | 24:31
I... Have I've never resold an NFT and I've never resold a physical piece of work.
So evidently I'm a hoarder. I just keep all the things. There is one actually very old poster that was gifted to me at one point. That really does not.? Within anything that I own. And I think I will look to sell that in particular. Because it's very large and takes up a very big space in my home and it's just very not, it was never really aligned to what I like and As I said, it was a gift...
So I think that we'll need to find a new home.
Speaker 1 | 25:20
Yeah. I'm curious. We've talked a lot about visual aesthetic taste and the meaning in the work. But I'm curious, what role does artists' intention play like in your collecting decisions or like versus what the work does on its own without knowing their intentions. I'm curious how that fits together with like what your experience is when you, like what you're looking for when you walk up to a work for the first time.
Like how much are you reading the wall text or engaged with engaging with the curators of the show to figure out like do I like this work or is it just the gut feeling and Yeah, intention, context, curatorial, context, all of that layered in.
Speaker 2 | 26:03
For sure. Obviously Nice, obviously.
So from my perspective generally what I like to do is I And I'm going to use a traditional sense of like walking into a physical space, like walking into a gallery. Generally, I like to go in and do a round of just looking at all of the work without any mediation, whether that be looking at the wall text, looking at Speaking with the curator or the gallery assistant or anything like this, I just want to look at the work and see if the work strikes and resonates. And grabs my attention. Particularly, I like to walk in and just sort of scan the whole room and see like, does anything jump out and really grab me from far?
And then... I can go investigate those things, those physical objects. I think the flip side is then just going, one by one, and going through and looking at the body of work as a whole. And seeing just what stands out to me. From there, then I like to read the text that goes with it, whether it be an artist statement or curatorial statement, whatever that is.
And then at that point, if I'm really compelled by something, I will generally go ask questions of the individual on site. To learn more.
So typically it goes in that sort of order, usually in the traditional art world. The artist is not terribly accessible to the collector. Unless you're a very large collector and spending a lot of money or you have a lot of pieces by that person.
So, to me Really the curator becomes that, or the gallerist becomes that intermediary between the artist and myself...
So that's, I mean, that is generally the escalation path that then leads to a purchase. For me, and I say this as both a collector and as a curator and as someone who travels all over the world and goes to a lot of exhibitions, a lot of museums, a lot of biennales.
Like there is Nothing worse. Then reading a wall text or reading a review in Artforum or Artnews, Artnet, whatever it is, seeing something on Instagram, reading the blurb and The text. Feels like it doesn't actually relate to the artwork itself. And this happens very frequently.
Like, I will read a text and... You get super excited and then you go see the work and you're like, Am I in the right show? Am I in the right place? What happened? And I think particularly it's getting worse. I think it was getting worse as people started extensively copy editing it. And there are sort of professionals whose sole existence is to copy edit, artwork texts And now with ChatGPT, large language models, the ability to put your text into ChatGPT and say, make this sound like Hans Ulrich Oberst or Michelle Kuo or whatever, just augments that so dramatically that then there can be this really radical disconnect between the text and the work... I would highly caution against doing things like that. I understand that potentially you want to make the work sound fancy, whatever that means to you. But Ultimately, I think that it's better if it sounds really authentic. And it feels authentic to the work itself.
Speaker 1 | 30:21
Yeah, completely. I remember reading, there's a little red book on how to write about art that a lot of people, how to write about contemporary art that a lot of people pick up at some point. And they talk in it about how within that context, Within the art world, right, sometimes the writing is the thing that gets outsourced to the junior members of a team because writing is hard and time consuming and annoying to do at times. And so a lot of the bad art writing we see is because we don't give it the time or the skill level or experience level more accurately required to actually get better wall text. Which is to say better meaning making around the work. I'm curious. Go ahead.
Speaker 2 | 31:03
I think there's this I think there's this propensity to feel like you need to use all the fancy jargon of the art world and like, pull out a textbook and use all the buzzwords. Which inevitably leads to like me needing to use chat GPT to ask it, what did this person mean? In this sentence? What is this? And I think that comes with having like the junior gallery assistant, right?
Like typically they're a couple of years out of their master's degree, let's say in art history or something like this. And so they're going to put all the buzzwords that got them an A in their class into this text. But then for general person who's visiting or engaging with your text, doesn't make any sense.
So I think that really being Especially if it's an artist's statement, ensuring that it sounds very genuine that it comes from the heart, that it really reflects the body of work itself. To me, that's... Really important and you can just tell I don't know that I can tell you how but like instinctually you can just tell when you read an artist statement, like what is genuine and what has been overly massaged by very active gallerist.
Speaker 1 | 32:29
Editor. Man, I was finishing editing, re-editing a 34-page art history paper of mine. I know. Things I've chosen to do with my life. What am I doing? And in it, there was a moment I had someone looking over my shoulder, helping make the last pass through it just to catch any last errors. And they're like, you know, in this sentence, you could put in that you're talking about the ontological nature of it. And I was like, Yes, I could. And depending on who's reading it, that would be the right choice to make. But that's not the audience I choose to write for often, even when I'm writing something academic.
Speaker 2 | 33:08
Agreed. Yeah, it's Who's your audience and write for your audience? I think that's true of any field. Any profession.
Speaker 1 | 33:19
Who do you think the audience is then in a gallery wall text? Like the kind of Right. Museum wall text is not what the artists who are in this program are mostly writing.
So if they're working to write a blurb to go next to an artwork of theirs, like who is the audience they should have in mind?
Speaker 2 | 33:39
I would ask your gallerist who normally walks through these doors, I think that if the work is being shown in Goshen, Houser and Wirth, Zwirner, etc. That's a very different person than the work if it's shown in which might be a gallery some of you know on the Lower East Side that's focused on digital art and bringing the digital into the physical. And I think that it's very dependent on who's the demographic of the gallery that you're showing with, particularly asking questions if it's a gallery you're not familiar with or if it's in a market you're not familiar with.
So, you know, for example... If you now are showing with a gallery in Paris or a gallery in Tokyo and you have never been to the gallery, perhaps you've never been to the city in general, asking like who typically comes to these shows? What is the typical education level? Is this someone who's just exploring they come in and they're curious you're in a very pedestrian area you get a lot of tourists coming in because they see something cool in the window or is this a very serious art educated art community that's coming to your events and trying to understand that so the text can be geared a little bit more towards who is walking through the doors to me would be the right bright path to answering that question for yourself.
Speaker 1 | 35:17
Absolutely. Yeah, it's very much asking the right questions and setting it to the context. When you come to an artwork and you're trying to make sense of it, whether that's on an emotional or cognitive level, Art is about trying to say something and what we say means something.
So where does the meaning usually live for you? In relation to an artwork? Are you-- How do you try to encounter it or enter into an artwork when you're finding your way in and what makes it strong. When you're looking at it or trying to make sense of it.
Speaker 2 | 36:01
Good question.
I was explaining when I walk into a gallery and I'm using a physical gallery here, though the same could be true of how I look at work. Digitally where I'll go into the portal or the website, whatever, and then Usually it turns into I've opened 500 tabs to look at all the different works in different tabs. Borderline crash my computer. But I will kind of walk into the physical room, let's just say for the purposes of discussion, and look at everything. And typically I'm trying to find, is there something that really strikes me at first glance that pops out at me.
You know, from there, typically I will go and really try to think through, okay, like what are, and do, like a visual analysis of the work, right? Which I understand you're working on with the students right now going through and walking up to work and thinking, okay, well, what are the component pieces And this is very typical of contemporary art where usually a lot of physical elements are brought together to then symbolize something very different when they're all brought into a coherent whole.
So what are these pieces individually trying to What are they trying to say? How does that build over the course of time? What is the what is the story that they're trying to tell, Then I'll try to think through, like, where's the artist from? What is the artist's, potential background, do does this pen have a different meaning for them based on where they grew up. Is there a different set of symbols behind the physical object that perhaps I am not privy to? As American. And trying to kind of put all of that together, puzzle piece it together, think about it, really spend time with the work. For me, I found that deepens my appreciation with it than just saying, " I don't understand what this is.
Like, give me the text to go along with it and let me just read it." Of course, there are instances where you're just trying to get through a lot of galleries and see a lot of things and doing that sort of detail-oriented approach doesn't work. But that is what I attempt to do of looking at trying to place that meaning into the artist intent and understand the artwork more comprehensively. Is that answer your question?
Speaker 1 | 38:53
It does, yeah. I'm curious how that changes then when you shift into a curatorial role, which you've done quite a bit of.
Like when we're working with artists as curators, we aren't simply trying to read the meaning, we're trying to make sure that the meaning is there in the first place. And obviously that is where a lot of our students are coming from in artist commons, is they're thinking about how do I put meaning into my work? How do I make sure that there's depth to it? And so I'm curious how you think about that when you're curating what you're selecting for or what it means to nurture work to make sure those things are true.
Speaker 2 | 39:32
- Good question. Typically, when I've curated shows in the past. It's a little bit different between group shows and solo shows. In the case of solo shows, It's only your work. Your work is the only thing that's going to be seen in this gallery. Context. Typically, I like to sit down with the artist and really start from a place of what is it that you want to express? What is it? That you are looking to create. And it's very much centered around the artist. Usually it is not me as the curator coming to the artist with, Here's this cool idea. How would you go execute it? Usually in the case of solo shows, it's much more the artist has an impetus of what they want to do.
And then that and go down lots of different paths. And to me as a curator, Over the course of time, my role is not to say that's good or that's bad. But more To say like this was the core idea. Are we still expressing that core idea? Is that still where we want to go? Is this aligned? To what we wanted to set out to express or to achieve. And it could be that over the, and again, you know, the artist-curator relationship Last. Months, if not years. It could be that what The artist wishes to express changes and evolves over the course of time. And I don't see my role as hemming that in or stopping that. It's more just being thoughtful of, is this the path we want to go down? Okay. If we want to go down this path, we now have gotten from A to B to F, Does "be" still stand true? Does it still resonate? Does it still fit within this complete body of work in a way that tells a story Or does the fact we jumped to F mean that now we need to go to H and now the show needs to be F to H and B is sketch, right? As you're saying, like, what is a sketch, right? Is it? Supporting work. That doesn't get shown and exhibited and that's fine. That's part of the curatorial process.
So to me, I see the role of the curator almost as like you're you're like art therapy. Like I'm like your psychologist. What are you trying to say? Why are you trying to say it? How does, how do you feel? How does this make you feel?
You know, I was actually joking with really, very prominent artist about this in Miami in December. I think that in many ways for solo shows in particular, that is the role of the curator becomes a little bit like the therapist of helping you bring out a great for helping you bring your vision to life. In the case of group shows, I think it's very different. In the case of group shows, the curator has a very specific idea of what they want to express. There is a curatorial concept And at least in my experience, this might not be for every curator. In my experience, there is a curatorial concept of writing the text you are telling artists, I really like your work. I think this work will really resonate within this theme... Here is the theme. What can you create? That will align to it. Or I really like this work that you made three years ago and think it strongly aligns to the theme. Can I include it? Is this in your private collection? Is this in someone else's collection? Can you connect me to the collector so I can get it on loan to put it to the show?
So to me, it's very different. When you're a curator of a group show, to me, it's a much more heavy-handed approach. Because it is the inspiration is from the curator. Whereas when it's a solo show, the inspiration is helping the artist bring their ideas to life. My opinion.
Speaker 1 | 44:03
Absolutely. Yeah. Are there any themes or new works or exhibitions that you feel like are oversaturated at this moment, especially just coming back from Miami a few months ago?
Like what feels overdone at this point? Please stop.
Speaker 2 | 44:35
No, that's a good question.
Speaker 1 | 44:40
We can come back to it if another idea comes to mind.
Speaker 2 | 44:48
Yeah, I don't know if I feel like any work is overdone As much as I think it's a problem with the gallery, not the artist. Like, I think that galleries, you always see this in like January, February of every year. Art news, Artnet, like all these outlets interview galleries of what is going to be the new hotness for that year.
And then I think galleries fall into this trope of like showing that work because they think they'll be collectors for that work. Because at the end of the day, the gallery, whether it's going to an art fair or showing work within their own walls, those walls can be digital walls, but like, you know, within their own space, Thank you. They are a commercial organization. They need to sell things to make money to continue their operations. And so if they think that Soft sculpture is the hotness of that year. They're going to wind up showing a lot of soft sculpture because they think that's what people are buying. I wouldn't really say that that's the fault of the artist. I think that's the fault of the gallery. I think as an artist, if you have something that you want to express and that is the best medium for you to express it, then you should do what is right by that idea. By the concept, by your desire of artistic expression I don't think that you should artificially hem yourself in to either working within artistic modes of expression just to align to the trend of the moment, nor do I think you should avoid specific materials to avoid the hotness of the moment. Does that make sense?
Speaker 1 | 46:32
Yeah, everything comes back around at some point. And just because you're out of trend right now, like you will eventually be in trend, but you want to be authentic to your practice and what you're doing. Exactly. So I'm curious, can you Because some of our curatorial relationships span, you know, not just months but years and Can you describe what it's like to basically put together an exhibition working so closely. Let's talk about solo shows in particular since we're talking about longitudinal relationships. How do you know when something's exhibition ready? Do you start working with artists before there's a clear sense of, we're going to do a show next fall and we've got six months to prep it? I think nested in here is like what happens when the work isn't ready and how do you navigate that with an artist?
Speaker 2 | 47:28
So many good questions. So... Usually in my experience, it's been very much that like, We have this date or this window to do a show and there is this much time to get from A to B. And so how can we develop that? Typically, especially with digital, it's easy to adjust easier to adjust dates because It's all digital and you can It's not like a physical show where you're doing an install and a hang and there is a very set schedule that can't really move. To me, there's always that initial conversation of what do you want to explore And how long do you think it's going to take you to explore that concept fully and to a level that you will be satisfied with... And it really comes down to the artist. And so starting down that path, having a rough sense of, okay, this can be September of 2026. Great. Okay. Let's do weekly check-ins or bi-weekly check-ins. Every two weeks, we're going to have a call. How's it going? Do you need any help? What are you thinking? Et cetera. Then as the date gets closer, weekly check-ins, then check-ins two times a week and make sure that things are progressing at the rate at which they have to progress. I found setting deadlines is really important. I think that this happens with artists. I think this happens with anyone who gets very involved with an idea And that could be writing an academic text, an art historical text. It could be doing research into a topic, it can be scrolling crypto Twitter, you know, any of these things you lose, you get time blindness. And so I think having very specific check in points and deadlines is very important to make sure that you're not succumbing to time blindness. You're continuing to progress. In a productive manner towards the end goal... And ultimately then, especially in the digital space, it's very easy to be like, you're actually going to need more time. Let's move that to February, 2027. For argument's sake, right? Be able to shift things around When you're talking about physical galleries, you really don't have that flexibility.
So for those of you thinking of working in physical spaces, Deadlines are very hard set and moving deadlines is very difficult... I think that Through that course, you as a curator really get a sense of who the person is and how they work. And you very much get a sense of they are forever going to be three days late to a deadline. And you just mentally map that where if you say the deadline is the 15th, they're going to deliver it on the 18th every single time. And that is fine. And you learn to live with it. Or You start learning like, this person's habitually going to be two weeks late and this is going to be a really big problem as we get closer to the end...
And then that's something that you need to sort of course correct and adjust through the process. With regard to when the work is done.
Typically, there comes a point at which a curator or an institution, a gallery, a museum an online platform will be like the work must be submitted and done by this date, because after this date to hit the exhibition deadline, these other assortment of things need to happen. The curatorial text needs to be written, the wall text needs to be written, Social media posts need to be created like all of this other business stuff. Has to happen. And you start realizing very quickly as you start coming up to the drop dead date that everything needs to be done, that if the artist is still significantly changing things, significantly adding things like the work is really not done. I think that artists sometimes have a tendency to look at the work and be like, it'd be really cool if I added this thing or this thing changed. There's one really specific show that I'm thinking about. From when I was at Ferrofile that in the six weeks leading up to the drop dead date that the work had to be done by. Every single time we got on the call with this artist, there was a change. " now I hired a sound engineer and we're going to add this whole oral element into the artwork." The artwork's supposed to be done in two weeks. What do you mean you're adding a whole oral thing and like that's I appreciate that sounds really cool, but that's kind of a problem because this is a huge expansion of the artwork and now you only really have two weeks for it to sit and coalesce and to work together And I don't really know if that's enough time. And so you start realizing in the lead up to the exhibition, to that drop dead date as I'm referring to it, it's like if things keep getting added on and tacked on, that's generally a sign that either the artist is not confident in the final product or the work really just isn't done yet. And so at that point, you sort of need to say, okay, we need to hit pause here.
Like, Can the work go out as it is? And then maybe this becomes a series and you want to do another iteration of this and show this at another point in time at another place in the future like where do we put guardrails around this so this can go out as it is or do you want to just hold it and we can just move the date three months into the future, six months into the future, and figure out what to do in the interim. And again, that's something that you can do in a digital space that you really can't do in a physical space. But it becomes very clear and very frustrating. And especially then as the curator, it becomes really hard to write about the work. If you keep adding on. Bells and whistles all over the place.
Like there was a core concept that you wanted to get across and now It's like, and an extra leg and six eyes. And like, how do you explain that? And particularly then it becomes difficult in this particular artist's case because it became impossible to have like an elevator pitch for the artwork. The artist felt that every single component that had been added into the work over time was absolutely fundamental to understanding the artwork. And so instead of being able to say, this artist and this exhibition and this artwork and it's about this in four sentences, it turned into a treatise of paragraphs. Because there really wasn't time for it all to like coalesce into a coherent whole. And that becomes extremely problematic because putting on my collector hat collectors have a very short attention span. They are evaluating things and looking at things, whether you're at an art fair walking through hundreds of booths over the course of a specific number of hours or whether you're online and you have not only the exhibition open, but then Twitter's open on the side and WhatsApp's pinging you and your email's dinging and all of these things are happening.
Like your attention span is not infinite. And. If you can't succinctly convey what is your exhibition, What did you want to explore Why was this inspirational for you? In an elevator pitch and six sentences, you're going to lose people. If you need that much explanation, you're going to lose people.
So really distill it down to that core And I think that comes back to that process at the beginning when I work with artists for solo shows. Like, what is it that you want to express? What is the idea that you want to explore? Make it really succinct, like make it simple. And then being able to Craft. That artist text or curatorial text off of that really simple core, to me is the easiest recipe for success.
Speaker 1 | 56:50
I think that's a really good solution to the problem in a lot of ways. The spinning off and doing multiple iterations like, maybe this is a series.
I mean, I think the word that really resonates with me in there is sitting with the work. And when you are working to deadline, it's like, okay, I'm going to work right up until this moment and then that's the finished work. Except two weeks later you look at it and you see new things that you could not see in the moment of making and that just requires time to sit with it and I feel like more artists should build that into their process like part of their own timeline.
Speaker 2 | 57:27
I definitely agree with that. I am very deadline and timeline focused. Process-oriented in my own life. And so I feel like when I'm a curator, I kind of enforce that on other people. And always trying to build in those points of, discussion and dialogue. And one of the things that I learned through the process of working at Ferrofile is like the beginning of every call We would start every call with the artist of put the artwork on the screen. And just like, you know, let it run, let it play. If it's a video, if it's code, If it's stills like flip between the different ones and let's just sit with the artwork for the first five or 10 minutes, like before we, you know, say, hi, how are you? Whatever, before you get into the nitty gritty, before you get to the problems, before you get to the challenges, let's just sit and look at the work. And appreciate how has it changed? How has it evolved? Where are we? Always start with the art. And then start formulating the conversations around that. To then figure out, okay, this is evolving, this is changing, this is the friction. I'm struggling with this. What do I do? Do is definitely something that I've heard as well.
So I think start with the art and drill into the opportunities, the challenges, and how Come back to the core idea. How does this relate to the core idea? How has the idea evolved? How has it changed? How is it changing week over week? And where are those guardrails that it's now just merging into a whole different entity that perhaps was never intended And how does that align into your ability to show the work that you have now?
Like you cannot iterate forever. One of my mentors said a deadline gets shit done.
So at some point you need a deadline that needs to be done and work towards that deadline.
Speaker 1 | 59:41
I certainly feel that. The So I'm curious what advice you would give to artists who I've heard from several of our artists in the program talk about how They don't start with a concept or an idea. They don't have that nugget at the center they make, and then they try to figure out the meaning after the process. Does that change when you were doing your work at Ferrofile because the caliber of artists you were working with, they generally had figured out what they were about? Or... The idea was there by the time you came and did a studio visit and first saw the first version or I'm curious what advice you would give to artists who are still trying to find their idea or concept.
Speaker 2 | 01:00:27
I think in the end, I think in the end, if you're creating a work, If you're creating work, you're in the studio. And you're just like riffing. And you're creating interesting things There's going to be something that grabs you about the fact that you want to create more like that. It's a brushstroke that you like, it's a movement that you like, it's a color that you like, it's a plotter movement with a specific pen and a specific color that really appeals to you. It's the way emotion is able to be layered and expressed in a stable defense diffusion model, like there's something that's going to gravitate that you're going to gravitate towards in this process of just like riffing and creating And then you're going to say, like, I want to create more like that. And I'm going to keep creating more like that. Or you'll just create a whole bunch of things and you're going to look at. 10 or 15 plots or paintings or whatever and be like, those are the ones I like. I think there's a process of really being critical. Why are those the ones that I'm gravitating to? What is it? And what does that say? And why do I want to make more of it? And I wouldn't, I don't think you should shy away from like, I like that because The brushstroke to me is really visually appealing and it just makes me happy.
Like that's fine. If it just makes you happy, it makes you happy. Make more of it. If it makes you happy, it's going to make other people happy. If you find the color really appealing and you think the depth of the burgundy is incredible and has been Unseen since Rothko. Make more of it. People will like it.
Like... That's fine. I don't think that every work needs to have this like super deep. Ground to it. It doesn't all need to explore. I think this trend towards like the work needs to say something really fancy is very much of the contemporary moment. And needs to have some sort of social commentary. Work was not always Like that. And so if you just think it's visually appealing and pretty, make more of it. That's Okay. That's fine. You can write a whole wall text behind, I think this color is amazing. I guarantee you can. You can riff on it and write about it. I think this brush stroke is amazing. You can figure it out. I think just explore what it is that you really want to do more of, whether that's what you want to say or whether that's what you want to see.
Speaker 1 | 01:03:29
Yeah, sometimes when I see artists who have gone that route, The text that I end up seeing is like a sentence or two long instead of the minimum six that I would expect to help me enter into a piece.
Speaker 2 | 01:03:44
I think. Yes, I get that.
I mean, I think being really Thoughtfully reflective on the why and this is where The art therapist, like the curator therapist comes to play. You know, You like this color with this brush stroke. Why do you like this brush stroke in this specific curving motion? Why do you like it sliced across the canvas, like what does that mean to you?
You know, does this resonate with the mountain range you saw on your holiday. Two years ago and it was the best trip you've ever taken and now you're the color and the brush stroke and the curvature of the stroke is bringing in those sorts of subconscious associations, right?
Like to me, it really would be sit with the work and be really critical and really honest, just like free associate, get a notebook and free associate. Why do you like this?
Like, put words on a piece of paper and then figure out how to edit them appropriately because I do think that there is Like, why does that color resonate? What is it that you like about that? Why does that shape resonate with you? I think that there are deeper things that people dismiss as, it's like gut instinct, but there's a reason that you develop that gut instinct in the first place.
So sit with it a little bit and, Try to figure that out.
Speaker 1 | 01:05:25
Yeah, when I'm looking at art, like I want to collect art from people who could have only come from that person. And so if they're not finding the reason for that kind of stroke or that kind of particular shade, then I'm not understanding why it can only come from them. And I find part of the wall text, part of the artist statement is, for the artist to help invite me in to help me see this came from me and could only come from me. And that is why part of what makes this good art, I would think.
Speaker 2 | 01:06:01
And I think actually that's a good point that I'll piggyback on. Yes, and to everything you just said. One of the things as both a collector and as a curator that We were very... That I'm very focused on is like, How? If you're an artist, And you've now been exploring a concept or color or theme or brushstroke, whatever it is, you've been exploring this core thing How does that continue evolving over time?
Like there are a lot of artists that I go to all these art fairs and I look at the work in a booth and I'm like, I have seen this exact artwork five years ago in their very first gallery show and nothing has changed, nothing has evolved. And at this point, we're just creating more work for the sake of creating more work. And It's not getting better. It's not showing evolution. It just feels stale and stagnant. I will admit, I think that because of my involvement in the digital arts space, I think my expectation of the rate of evolution is very high at this point. And I do acknowledge that I think when I look at painting or sculpture, physical works, I think many times my expectations are perhaps too high, like too fast, because it's very different to be able to like iterate with a physical painting practice than it is iterating with code. But I do think that at the end of the day, when it comes to that idea, like drilling into what are those conscious or subconscious influences that are making you explore this. Then helps give you a framework to say, okay, now I need to iterate it in this way, or I want to explore this offshoot of it. I want to do this and be able to continue evolving the work. Because as a collector, like I don't want to collect something five years ago and then go 15 years later and see that you've created pretty much the same thing that I collected 15 years ago, except now rather than 30 of them, there are 300 of them. And what is the value? Of that work especially if I want to resell it because now there are so many replicas or close copies of it circulating in the ecosystem like "I don't know if I really like that." Equally as a collector, if I want to get involved with your practice, and support you as an artist more comprehensively and support the evolution of your vision if all you're doing is creating the same thing for 15 years and rather than the first 30, they're now 300. It's very hard for me to get involved in that sense. And so I think being able to drill in on that core idea and then be able to continue exploring it in different ways, exploring different nuances and having words around it. For that evolution for both a collector standpoint and a curatorial standpoint, is very It's a very good idea. It's very highly recommended.
Yeah.
Speaker 1 | 01:09:25
So In my own experience curating, especially with artists with a tech-based practice, they often come into what they're making through a tool, a technique that they get really interested in, which the way we're talking about it is not very different from getting obsessed with a color or brushstroke. But I find I still get a lot of pushback when it comes to, I need to explain this or I need to put meaning in on this? And you've worked with a lot of artists with a tech-based practice. I'm curious how you've navigated that in that moment. Is it just more of what we've been saying, or is there a particular shift when they have that kind of practice? Or way into making work through a technique.
Speaker 2 | 01:10:10
So there are two sides of the equation. I'm just going to cite operator, no tech demos, like this is not a tech demo. If The concept actually requires that piece of technology, the code, whatever it is, if that is like the fundamental linchpin of explaining what the work is, Like that is going to be a problem. No tech demos, like there needs to be something more behind it than that. Secondly, And I have learned this kind of the hard way. You will wind up showing this work to people who don't understand technology, to people who don't code, to people who walk in off the street. Think about Hold in your mind a North Star of a museum you want your work to be collected by. Right. MoMA, The Met, The Whitney, LACMA, Pompidou, You name it, right? The person that walks in off the street to go look at your work of art in MoMA do not know how to code. They don't know what a stable confusion model is.
Like maybe they understand what ChatGPT is, but if you say large language model, they don't know what that means. They don't understand that ChatGPT is a large language model, right?
So if your artwork requires an advanced understanding of technology And that is like a crucial fundamental part of explaining what it is you are going to lose and disconnect from the audience because the audience is not going to be able to understand work. They're not going to understand the idea behind the work. They're not going to understand the wall text behind the work.
So there needs to be something that can exist outside this framework of my amazing stable diffusion model. Well, okay, there needs to be something more. And one of my I found this as a collector where I'll talk to other collectors that don't collect digital art. They don't know anything about digital art. They are trustees of museums and they are all over 75 years old. And to them, like digital art is the thing their grandkids will deal with. And they're like, it's not their problem. And I'll explain it. I'll be like, what's amazing about this is this. And it's this custom built, stable diffusion model, et cetera. And they're like, Whitney, I don't know what you're talking about. This doesn't make sense to me. Isn't visually appealing. I see it. Does it strike me visually? And that's all they care about. And they literally cut me off mid-sentence. They're like, you're speaking a foreign language. I don't know what this means...
So I think you have to keep in mind that to you stable diffusion model or the technology itself, whatever it is really crucial and fundamental And it is deeply important for the creation of the work, but if the whole work hinges on that, It's not going to resonate with the audience. It's going to resonate with this very small group of people, yourself and your milieu of other artists that can speak your language, but it's not going to actually resonate more broadly than that.
So I would strongly advise that you keep that in mind.
Speaker 1 | 01:13:28
Yeah, absolutely. I've been looking at a lot of AI generated artwork this week for a conference paper I'm giving at CAA on AI and labor and the aura of art. And it's got me thinking about the difference between having an aesthetic and making an artwork.
Like I showed a piece, a video piece from an artist I like who's released with Fellowship, which is another online art platform, to someone and they just kind of sighed because to them it looked like a piece you could, that they would show up in their Instagram feed and you'd be like, yep, this is just more AI art built on stolen art. And I can't tell what the difference is between this as just like an aesthetic choice that someone prompted quickly versus someone who made something with a lot of effort. I'm curious, like, How do you know when an artist has made real decisions and not just created an aesthetic? And I mean, I would guess you would say that matters, that it's important not to just create an aesthetic.
Speaker 2 | 01:14:32
.. Speaking really specifically about AI art.
Speaker 1 | 01:14:39
Just generally. I mean, the... There are times when I walk into a gallery setting and I look at a work and I'm like, I connect with this. I emotionally resonate with it. And you described earlier just like You read the wall text and like it hollows it out or it puts a wall between you and the work. And I know we have a lot of artists who are working, again, with tech, various technologies in our program, generative systems that are code-based. There are three AI artists in our program right now. And again, where is the line between making meaning with work and making just something that looks meaningful? Aesthetically cool, which can get you to stop and linger in the timeline, but gets people like who I was showing the work to this week just a deep sigh. To me, it just looks like more... More art, more of this type of art that I already don't connect with because I don't think of it as art. And again, maybe, and this is part of where my thesis is going for this paper, and this is what I'm thinking about this week, is that part of the problem is context, right? If we had a Our philosopher of art has talked about how the a museum context or gallery context imparts to the work That this is art And when I scroll through something and I just see it on my iPhone, the same place I say, see memes and like weird, like, Jesus meme AI made images with text. It's hard to distinguish between the two.
So maybe a better question is like, how do you think about the importance of context when showing digital work, especially when we're experiencing in the same context as all this other media content? Which is some of that stuff in our feed is art and some of it is not art, but it's all getting mashed together. Do we as artists have a role here? What role do curators have? Work within these means or push back against them.
Speaker 2 | 01:16:47
Great question.
The digital feed Your work is going to wind up in the digital of Instagram scrolling and X scrolling and all of these other places..
When I was at Ferrofile, the focus when it did when the work was moving into social platforms, and living within these ecosystems of content was always around how do we ensure that there is the appropriate framing text to go with the work and not letting it live like by itself in this very disjointed manner. You know, making sure that the artist's name, the artwork, title, here. Maybe not a full description, but at least a few sentences about it. With a link sending back to the source of the full work, like all of that would always exist together. Yes, of course, someone can just scroll through Instagram and just see the picture and it just lives in the feed with all of the other things. And that's just an inevitable part of what it is. To the contemporary condition and how you exist in the world. But for me, the focus was always around how do we try to create framing text and references so that but the person who does stop And Actually, wants to read words that they can learn more and that they can understand that this is not an AI generated cat that this has like a lot more thought behind it. For AI art in particular, I am a big training data junkie.
Like I'm very interested in what is in the training data. Where did it come from? And why did the artist use like what is the meaning behind the selection of that training data? And that comes from my work with Holly Herndon and Matt Dryhurst. I'm very They have taught me to be very focused on what is the training, like what is the importance of the training data? And so there are works that I've purchased where I've been, I sort of gravitated to them. Out of a whole body of work and I've talked with the artists more about it and the artists would be like, actually, And they kind of treat it as like a throwaway, like, actually the training data for that one's a little bit different. That actually has this other thing component ingredient put into it. And that has triggered me to purchase the work because I'm like, well, I want that one because it's like. The different, it has like the different training data.
So to me, I'm very interested in like, what did you pick? Why did you pick it? What is the training data behind it? And how does that set it apart from just being another like, cat versus Godzilla AI generated meme. I have four cats. I love cats.
So I love seeing that sort of stuff. And it brings me delight and joy. But like, you know, how does the training data that you've selected potentially influence the artistic intent that you have behind the work and what you've made?
Speaker 1 | 01:20:29
And Matt and Holly Herndon, for those who don't know, right, two very authoritative voices on the use of AI as a tool in art making.
Like they were in the last Whitney Biennial two years ago. They make incredible work.
So that's a good place to start if you're feeling skeptical or the existential crisis that we're all feeling. It's just some of us have found some of the good out there amidst all of the bad. One question we got from one of the students was, I'm curious how curators judge artists' social media. Is there anything that they should do or anything that they should avoid in how they approach this?
Speaker 2 | 01:21:10
.. Instagram is the place for the traditional art world. I know in like the digital art realm, X is where we all live. That is not where the art world lives when it comes to social media. They live very much on Instagram. I think that making sure that all of the posts. Are like appropriately framed, like the artwork is not off kilter unless it's like intentionally supposed to be off kilter. But you know, making sure that everything fits nicely within the grid. And I would encourage some sort of At least in the caption should be like the artwork title and the year that it was created. Even if you don't want to have like a long text to associate with every single work.
So that then if the artist is scrolling through, particularly think about what I'm looking at. Curating group shows, if I'm looking at different artists, like I'll typically pull up their Instagram as like a portfolio, so to speak, and can scroll through And then if I find something I like, I want to be able to easily reference, I liked this work from 2019. I don't necessarily want to take screenshots of the artwork and like send it to the artist. Which one is this? What is this? How do I find more of this? I would say that's helpful. I think having a nicely organized portfolio site is a very good idea so that you can easily then say, this is from 2019. Let me look at the portfolio site. This is the body of work it's from or the exhibition it was originally from. Let me go see more of that. It was at this gallery or these galleries, let me go look at the gallery websites, like keeping all of that organized and Having all of the links, making sure the links don't die over the course of time. It's like a big organizational project, but something that's very frustrating is, and I'm sure it's frustrating for the artists as well, is you know, the show was 10 years ago and now, the web pages exist on the museum website anymore, the gallery website anymore, and the link 404 and it dies and then it goes away. That's a very challenging situation for all involved. But if as the artist, you can be proactive in trying to solve that for your audience, whether it's a curator, a collector, anyone coming to your site. It's, Better if you're proactive about solving for that than just having it link out to a 404 dead page and then everyone's left scratching their heads.
Speaker 1 | 01:23:50
Yeah, and making sure you're going back every couple of months and checking those links again and making sure they're still working because websites change all the time. Like the site may not go down, but the root URL may have changed in some way.
Speaker 2 | 01:24:05
For the artists that I have a relationship with, if I find the dead links, like I'll just, like literally WhatsApp them or DM them on Instagram and be like, Hey, these links on your site aren't working anymore. You should go look at that. Go fix that please. Obviously, I don't do that for people I don't know, but for people that I do know, I do try to let them know so others, they can preempt that problem for others.
Speaker 1 | 01:24:30
Exactly. Right. This is said in love and I care. That's the only reason I'm DMing you about it. As we close out our time here, and I know there are plenty of things we didn't get to, but I'm curious, are there any misconceptions artists have about collectors?
We kind of started with collecting and sort of felt important to come back to it at the end here because it is an important part of your role in relation to artists, and I'm sure There are plenty of things artists misunderstand about collectors, but I'm curious from your experience, like, are there like one or two big misconceptions or pet peeves or things you wish were different about the relationship or situation?
Speaker 2 | 01:25:17
.. One of the things, I don't talk about myself as a collector very often in public, so this is really, it like really makes me think. I speak much more about curatorial roles. One of the things that I One of the things that I've seen collectors comment on social media is this concept that artists will be very critical of like, "Why didn't you collect this? Why don't you collect this? You've collected two of my works before. You should purchase more of it. You should buy more of it." And I think particularly in the digital landscape, because the boundary between collector and artist has disappeared, it's brought a lot of good, but it's brought a lot of bad without that intermediary buffer to help support the creation of the artwork and help support the collector refine their taste over time. And I think that if a collector doesn't, has collected your work before, but now does not collect your work again, like I wouldn't necessarily take it as insult or take it as something to be very critical of. I think that there's an opportunity to learn from that. I think that something that artists don't really think about is like collectors have financial limitations, like it's not an endless limitless bucket of money. And so at some point, they're-- Yeah, there is the reality that like you just... Financially can't afford something in a given moment or you know it's not a great time for you or you have other life expenses that are happening like it's not just a limitless amount of money.
So first of all, I think if someone has collected your work historically and doesn't collect something, don't just assume it's because they don't like it. It could be that they have real life going on, that they have other requirements to financially fulfill. And ultimately, I think look at it as an opportunity to potentially engage with that person or learn from that person, right?
Like why haven't they collected it? What don't they like about it? Or what is going on in their life and you can be compassionate as a human to their larger situations and be understanding of that and ultimately that just allows the opportunity for you relationship with that person that will hopefully serve you well throughout your career. You know, I think that's, one of the biggest things, like I think back to when I did my master's degree. I came back to my master's degree about 12 years after I did my undergraduate and I'd had a whole professional career. And I think when you're an undergraduate right out of high school and into university, like you see a professor is this like larger than life human that has no real world responsibilities or requirements. They're just your professor espousing knowledge to you.
And then when I came back to do my master's degree as an adult, you realize like, no, they have children. They have real life problems.
Like their child is sick. They are sick. They're in the hospital till 3 a.m. With their vet hospital with their dog. And now they're coming in to teach you at nine and they're ragged and they're exhausted, right?
Like there is a real person behind the professor with a capital P. And I think it's important for artists to realize that there is a real person behind the collector with a capital C and that it's not all like, Sometimes that real person or that real life stands in the way of larger aspirations of what one would love to own and just can't at any.
Speaker 1 | 01:29:26
Of course, yeah. It's, I think, very difficult to... I think one of the benefits right at this moment for artists that have been trying to connect with collectors more directly and sidestep the gallery model, which, again, that form of collector relationship to artists has only been around since the mid 1950s.
Like that was a real shift from how it had been prior to that to have this middleman. But yes, it presents these issues of We're talking to real people and they have real things going on and real constraints about it. This is my 25 cent word for the day, right? Macroeconomic conditions, right? The state of the political and financial world as a whole is affecting their ability to Right, we buy art out of expendable income and sometimes we don't always have that left. All right. I know we're over time, but I just want to close with this is going to be our last question going forward for a lot of our sessions. And so you're the first one to get this. What's something you're excited about in contemporary art right now that the students might not be paying attention to yet?
Speaker 2 | 01:30:38
..
Speaker 1 | 01:30:40
I know this could come from Miami because you were just there. And that's obviously where a lot of new stuff is getting shown, as well as old stuff like your knowledge or things that hasn't moved forward. But I mean, what gets you excited right now in contemporary art?
Speaker 2 | 01:31:00
Thinking about Miami, what got me really excited about Miami was.
What got me very excited is that it feels, and I'm speaking very specifically about digital art in this case, it feels like we've gotten to a point where there It's no... Really? I think that within the frame of digital art, artists have evolved from looking at the work on a flat screen, like on their phone, And now we're thinking much more about the context in which it lives. And that could be like, what is the screen? What is the resolution that I need?
Like they're getting much pickier about that. And I feel like the hardware is catching up so that they can be pickier about that.
So it's kind of this meeting of the middle. And I think that now artists are experimenting with combining different technologies in different A's?.. And, you know, looking at, okay, well, this was a generative work, but now I can combine this with 3D printing and I can use these different materials with 3D printing and it comes together to look like this versus then having plotter work that sits alongside it versus, you know, the robotics. Of people of it all.
You know, I think that looking at this expanded field of digital that felt very flat, I would say, like Going back to what I admitted in the beginning, like I purchased these early works on FX hash, not realizing they were generative algorithms thinking they were static outputs because that's how the platform was developed that made me think they were static outputs. Like that's what I thought I was minting on FX hash. In my opinion, that's as much a platform limitation as it is a platform. Collector literacy, my literacy problem.
You know, I think that the technology, hardware and software the display technologies, the familiarity with different technologies and how to mix and match them for the expression for artistic expression has evolved so much in such a short period of time. And to me, that's really exciting. Thinking about what could come next.
Speaker 1 | 01:33:34
Yeah, it feels like an exciting moment where we're on the cusp of so many possibilities and the future is arriving now. And as long as the world doesn't burn down, then Tech Based Art has a real opportunity here to enter into the canon and be part of the institutional conversation because it is how we're thinking, engaging with this moment in this time. Whitney, thanks so much for being here. Thank you for joining us for this conversation.
Sorry to the students who there were lots of great questions in the chat we didn't get a chance to touch on. So to close out for today, I just want to say thank you again for getting through the first five weeks, students of the program. It's been really exciting to see people start making connections between different lectures. And I know that what Whitney said today really built on a lot of the other things that you've heard in the last few weeks.
So I'm excited for that. I'm excited to hear what conversation this sparks for you in our discussion channels. I'm going to open up the business of art lecture discussion channel, which will be different from our art discussion channel.
So feel free to continue thinking about the business side of art, things related to collecting, things related to curating, things related to institutions and selling. We're going to have a special channel set aside for discussing that.
So I'll throw that up in the next few minutes. Any questions that you had in here that didn't get answered, please drop them in there. I certainly have opinions. I saw them as they came through.
So we'll continue the conversation there. Otherwise, we'll see you on Thursday for Jen and Kevin McCoy coming back for their final session with us of their five-week cycle with the program. They'll be doing a candid interview about what it's meant to build a long-term career in the arts. And those of you in cohort number two, I will see you in 50 minutes for our final day of presentations. Thanks again all for being here and we'll talk to you soon.