Haiver | 00:00
Hi, art friends. So glad to have you back with us for another great session from this quarter's visiting artist in residence Mitchell F. Chan over the last few weeks we've experienced some of Mitchell's installation art, we've experienced some of his interactive video game based art that really plays with the concept of user agency. We saw the breadth of his practice as a conceptual artist throughout his presentation and through our close looking session with his work. Today he comes to give a Craft Workshop that I am really excited for is a chance for us to peek behind the studio door and see more into Mitchell's process. He's designed for us a mini game that he is going to demo building. This includes a unit using Unity and a little bit of Blender. Even if you're not an artist working with digital tools, I think it's really fascinating to be able to see how artists work, what tools they use, what they're thinking about when they make all the micro decisions that accrue into what makes a finished work good or bad ultimately and Ultimately, I hope that through this time looking at Mitchell's process, it'll give you a chance to reflect on your own process, whatever medium you're working in, so that you can think about how to make the best decisions and the kinds of decisions that, again, will accrue into making good work rather than weaker work.
So let's welcome Mitchell F. Chan.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:34
Our last session so much. I'm... I'm very excited about this week's session.
So here's the plan, and I really did my research on this one. I watched all of Kevin and Jen's session that they did in their last craft workshop. Big shoes to fill, a lot to live up to. But that means that I'm in the Artist Commons chat.
So please feel free to hit me up there or on any of the other channels. I know we're all over the place. " to show off the process.
I mean, roughly the process of how I make one of my artworks, like going through step by actually doing it, by actually doing a small artwork. And my goal for this was... Not to you know we're not going to be able to create a masterpiece here in like 90 minutes but just go through all the tools that i use that's primarily unity and so i'm not sure how many of you in this session have used unity before you'll see it you'll see it soon enough and I decided I was going to try to do as little of the, "And here's one that I baked before the show." You know, bring it out, you know, in the cooking show, they like mix all the ingredients and they like show you like the perfect batch that they baked before.
Like, no, we're going to try to do it all in real time as much as we can. So we're going to see how far we can go. Because when I was kind of game planning this, obviously I was going really slow. But let's give it a shot and let's just jump right into it. That's enough preamble.
So I'm going to start really with a tool that probably a lot of you know. Let's start just by opening up Blender, and I'm going to show you why. Let's start.
So this is Blender for any of you who have never used it. And if you have used it, you're probably going to laugh at how kind of like primitive my skills are, and that's fine. And if you haven't, then here it is. It's pretty simple. It's like not It's not a complicated tool. I realize one of the big challenges of what we're doing is going to be me trying to make banter while I talk and do this.
So what am I doing here? You know, someone should have like a Bob Ross for digital art.
You know, let's see how many happy little friends we can make here. So I'm just building cubes, I'm scaling them. Why am I doing this? Why am I building all these cubes? I've decided that the game that we are going to build here is going to be a pinball game. We're going to try to build a simple little pinball game in Unity, and we're going to see if we can make it into an artwork.
So I'm just going to build... The kind of boundaries of this pinball game. We're not going to worry too much about it being perfect. And So I'm building these rectangles. Here we go. And so these are going to be kind of the boundaries of our thing. We're going to build not too many elements. I don't want to waste too much. That's not wasting time, but I don't want to use too much time here. Going to scale our ground here. And I'm going to scale it again. I remember when I first started learning Unity, the way that I learned how to do pretty much everything that I do was It's kind of a two-step process. One is, the biggest step really is the demystification of all this stuff. And it's actually why I decided to do the workshop like this. I exchanged some emails with Haver and talking about, how should I do it? And when he used the word demystification, it really clicked for me how important that stuff was. If you recall in last week's session, I mentioned that I really got my start... Doing these workshops at this artist-run center. And these were really brief workshops. They didn't last very long. And it's not like at the end of these workshops, all of a sudden I was good at processing or I was good at electronics or anything like that. It was just something that I wasn't afraid of anymore. And that was the most important thing.
So this is Blender and I know I'm not going through like saying, " yeah, no, press S to do this or press S to do that." You are just seeing it and you're seeing that it's not really hard. I started with these tutorials. Hold on, let's call this... Wall It's going to be important for me to name these objects here for reasons that you'll see later.
Haiver | 06:36
So at this stage, we're totally-- You've essentially made a series of cube shapes that you've turned into rectangles that you resize. They have three-dimensional mass to them. Do they have any other qualities?
Mitchell F Chan | 06:48
No, that's about it. To be honest, I'm not even really sure what the dimensions of these will be whenever we get into Unity. And that's all stuff that I would know if I were making one of my normal games. But this is like... But I would... I would end up tinkering with all that stuff, a little bit more than is really necessary. Let's start building.
So that's just kind of the playing field. Let's start building the elements of our pinball game. And you're going to see I only really need to do this once.
So I built a little cylinder here. Let's go in and edit it. To edit mode. Going to grab... The I'm going to grab these vertices here. I'm going to stretch them out. That's fine. I'm going to shrink these. And you know what I've built here? Yes, that's right. That's actually not how I wanted it. Let's shrink it on everything except the Z axis. Yep, that's going to be our pinball paddle. And that will do. Just fine, I think. That will be a nice pinball paddle. Call this... Paddle. And so you know what? Maybe I'll make it just a little bit longer. I'll grab these vertices over here.
And there we go. Okay, we only need one paddle. I guess it doesn't... Actually, I'm pretty happy with it being... I actually kind of do want to keep everything centered. This is just going to have the stuff that we need. And finally, let's build one more element. Let's build a pop bumper. If you're wondering the reason why I'm so like... Into pinball games, as if you can see over my shoulder. I'm building real physical pinball machines in my studio right now.
So this is all pretty fun. So let's build one more pinball machine. Building a new pinball machine will look like we're going to add another cylinder here. Here we go. Is that the right size for one of these bumpers?
Yeah, sure. Why not? Okay. Stop looking at everything else. And I think this down the Z axis right here. And edit. Add another cylinder, So, sorry, I was beginning to say..... The way that I basically started learning everything is two steps. I said there's a... I'd do a workshop that would demystify it so I wasn't scared of it anymore.
And then I would find these tutorials on YouTube. I know that's pretty common what things do. I used Blender Guru. He has a really great introductory tutorial He has a really great like introductory series where you like model a donut. And I would like, I was on, I remember when I did this, I was on family vacation and you know, there's only kind of only so much like being at the beach I could do. And I would just take like an hour every day of vacation and like go in and kind of, you know, get a break from the kids and learn some blender. And that was like pretty fun for me. That was a really good one for me.
And then for Unity, which we're going to get to, I think we got about like, Two more minutes of... Of a Blender in us. In Unity, I went to unity.com and to their Learn site. And sure enough, as you might expect, the Unity website has really good educational tools for learning Unity. And I just go through them very methodically. That's just for me. That's how I like to learn. I like there to be a lesson plan. I like there to be steps. I like that when I finish lesson one, I go to lesson two and it's all cumulative. And I really prefer that more than the hodgepodge of mixing and matching my own YouTube videos where sometimes you get... There are so many different ways, especially in digital art, there's so many different ways to do things. There's so many different techniques you can use to achieve any result. And sometimes they contradict each other.
So I really like this. Okay. Okay.
So I think this is pretty good. Let me just go and apply all my transformations here.
So Okay.
Haiver | 11:37
One question we got in the chat, Mitchell, was do the mechanics translate easily between building the physical game and this coded version?
Mitchell F Chan | 11:47
.. No, it's totally not at all. It's a completely different skill set I'm building.
I mean, I won't get it out, but like, because it's so outside the scope of what we're doing. And believe me, I thought about it. Doing this craft workshop on what I'm actually doing in the studio right now. And believe it or not, that tutorial would have been even more boring than watching someone use a computer. It would have been like, okay, watch me solder. I'm doing physical sculptures right now, like electromechanical sculptures. I'm just soldering wires. I'm like connecting relays to solenoid magnet coils and stuff like that. Because I'm on my digital art rumspringa. Is what I call it. And I'm just really enjoying building these electromechanical devices. And it's just a good palette cleanser. Another reason why I approach this craft workshop with a little bit of trepidation, because I haven't actually done this in a few months. And if I go a few months without using one of my tools, I get rusty. Okay, so let's set origin.
Almost done here. *Sigh* Okay, so I think this is fine. I think everything is pretty much centered. I think everything is pretty much where we want it. Okay. To, So now I'm just going to save this file. I created a folder for us here. And I was going to call this... Blender file Okay, so now here's where the real magic happens. That was 3D modeling. Hopefully, you're, you know, I think it's a skill that a lot of people here might be familiar with. Let's open up Unity.
So when I was trying to decide, okay, right, how do you decide what game engine to use? All right, there are artists who use Unity.
Like there are artists who use Unity, there are artists who use Unreal Engine, and there are artists who use like Godot or Game Maker Plus. Like the truth is... Live demo. I... It probably doesn't matter. You got to just pick one. And so many artists, they stop at picking the tool. Ableton Live or Pro Tools or like something else, like whatever's new. It doesn't matter. Just pick one. I tend to prefer like paying for professional software that I know is going to be supported by like...
You know, a company and have a lot of user contributions. Then kind of some of the more I find like a lot of the kind of open source projects can be a little bit janky. And I just I don't have time for that jank.
Like I need things to be smooth. Right.
So that's why I choose a lot of that. And Let me open up this one. And I chose Unity specifically because I knew I wanted my games to be NFTs. And Unity will export games for WebGL, which means they can run in your web browser and anything that can run in a web browser can be an NFT. My NFT games, it's as simple as putting my game as like a standalone single serving website and setting the URL to that website as the animation URI. For like in my NFT metadata.
Like it's really is, it's that simple. And so that's why I did that.
That's why I did Unity. I find if I can be a little bit snobby about things, I find that Unreal Engine projects all kind of look the same, and it kind of annoys me.
So that's why I choose Unity. And I know that you can... I don't know, probably for another person, they would say that all of the, all the Unity stuff. Can look the same. And later on, I'll show you how I put in a lot of effort to make sure that my stuff doesn't look the same. And I'll show you how. But this is Unity. And I think it's a great piece of software. I think it's just a great piece of software for compiling code. It's a great piece of software for making animation. And it's a very good piece of software for making games.
So, and this is what you get when you start off. You start off with this big old nothing.
So, let's start by actually taking that thing that we just made. I'm going to make a little down here, we have a little file browser. I'll make a little folder here, just called live demo. Got a little file browser down here, got a working window up top, and I've got a game display down here. Let's take that little file we made, that little Blender thing. Where did I find that? Where did I make that? It's called like template or something. Actually, you know what? I'm just going to resave it. Instead of waiting to try to figure out where I found it. What's... Okay. File. I'm going to save this over in All right.
Haiver | 17:35
Mitchell, I really appreciate the way you talk about picking your tools in a specific way, like ones that are not janky. Even this presentation software we're operating doing all our lower thirds and picture-in-picture stuff. There's an open version, but this one's not the janky one, and that one's just a little bit janky, which is really important.
Mitchell F Chan | 17:55
Yeah, and it's just, it's nice.
Haiver | 17:59
Yeah, I found a.
Mitchell F Chan | 18:00
Magic moment here. Sorry. Magic moment here. Okay, our Blender file, we're going to put it in and boom, right? It's just there. One of the other reasons why I like using Blender, and it's funny, right? I say that, but like Blender is an open source thing that's like free, largely community funded. But like it just works too.
Like it's not janky. So it's not that I love corporations. I just, I hate jank. I'm not dogmatic about anything. And that's good for me. Okay, so look, now we've got this in here. And so look what we've got in our scene. Whenever I create a scene in Unity, it looks a lot-- This window here looks a lot like Blender. It looks a lot like 3D modeling. You've got these same kind of handles that you move stuff up and down.
And then you've got this game display. This is what the game will look like. It'll look like this because one of the things that by default comes in your scene is this camera. And I can select the camera and I move it around my work view, and by moving it around in my work view, right, I can see what the output is going to look like in the game. Now, normally, one of the very first things that I do when I start working, and you're not supposed to do this. The way you're supposed to make a video game is like most of the first drafts of video games are, they use the term a gray box, because it's supposed to look like this. It's supposed to look like a bunch of gray boxes.
And then you can see if your mechanics work. And you can see if this thing is fun and you can see if this one gray box jumps in a satisfying way or something like that. But it drives me crazy. I like for things to look nice right away because, you know, I'm like, I'm an artist and I care a lot about the aesthetics of all this stuff.
So, and because you... Poor folks at home got to be watching this on a screen right now.
So let's just try to make what's on your screen look nice right away and give you as little gray box experience as possible. Now, this is really easy. For the purposes of this demo, and I'll show you the more complicated way that I do this. But basically, I have been, since I started making video games, one of the things that was going to be really important to me like right away was that the video games have a unique look. You heard me just say that the Unreal Engine aesthetic, it drives me crazy. And like, I'll name names, like go and look at the artists.
Like if you just like, and these are artists that otherwise, like I really like Jeremy Couillard's games, but it looks a lot like Gabriel Masson's game because they're both in Unreal Engine and they're not changing those default sliders enough. And I think that if I'm going to present myself as an artist who is working in game engines, it's my responsibility. And I know I'm going to have an uphill battle to present my medium as an artistic medium. And the first thing you should do if you're going to be fighting one of those uphill battles, like just go ahead and take care of the low hanging fruit. And the low hanging fruit is that it should look like art. And if you're an artist working in a medium, you should have a distinctive style in that medium. And I know that like probably, you know, I might get tagged as a conceptual artist more, but I care about that stuff. And I think one of the reasons why I get to be a conceptual artist is because I just take care of the low hanging fruit first.
Like I'm not above it. Nobody's above it, you know. And we'll get to that. We'll get into that even more when we come to some of the functionality stuff.
Anyway, all that is to say, Over the course of the past however many years since I've been doing this, I've been slowly working on my own library of shaders that give things its own distinctive look. And now when I start a new project, I just take the folder from the last project. I should have this on like a GitHub repo and stuff. I don't. I'm extremely disorganized. And I just drag the folder from the last project over here into the new project. It's a folder here. It's called MFC Grail Shade.
So I like to imagine it's like, you know, like you always got to have like a custom technology. Like this is like Nike Air Max technology. And it's like a piece of like, styrofoam that they put in the heel of the shoe.
Well, this MFC grail shade technology, I mean, it's like, it's blast processing for our generation is what it is. It's just absolutely revolutionary stuff.
So now here we are looking at how I kind of make stuff look nice. Let's look at kind of what this is in practice. I have a whole bunch of shaders here that I've coded in a combination of HLSL, which I'm not very good at, and Unity's own shader graph node-based connections. I've made a bunch of shaders. I've made a bunch of sample materials that I can just kind of throw onto things. Let's go ahead and throw that on. Here. Let's give that a sample material. Actually, first I'm going to copy this material. The, Is that what I'm going to do?
Yeah. Yeah, that's what I'm going to do.
Yeah, that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to copy this material. I'm going to call this LD for live demo ground. Copy it again, call this LD... - Alright, so I've got LD ground on the ground. I'll put the LD... - Flipper. On the flipper. And now I have in my material, I can change a whole bunch of properties, right? Let's make this LD ground. Let's give it a fun color. I don't care. We'll make it Orange or something. See how that goes. Is that going to show up? And I do a whole bunch of stuff. I'm going to show you all this stuff in a second. Let's turn. No, let's keep them on actually. And... Do that kind of classic I might want to change my camera here a little bit. What is going on here?
So, look, I made these shaders so that they have all these sliders that will change our hatching size and whatever. It's kind of just coming in here.
So let's see. All right, let's actually turn right. I might want to change this to my most, here we go. This is the one I want. Yes, there we go. I don't always maintain... My code that well, as you can tell. Okay, I've got a light in my scene. It's probably worth just making sure that's shining in the right direction. Sure, there we go. Okay, now we can go back to changing hour. What's happening here? Probably we have too many dots, not enough dots. No, we have two. There we go. Okay, great.
So you see how I make these shaders so they have stippling and hatching and stuff like that. Let's just get it looking reasonably kind of nice. Let's change this. No, that's not what's going to change. Let's give this just a second here.
Got a little bit of stuff.
Haiver | 25:51
So an artist watching this process, Mitch, who starts to see it can be as easy as dragging and dropping in a shader that someone else has built when they're starting out. Yeah. But you went in and coded these to create your own set of sliders and the effects that they have at some point, is that right?
Mitchell F Chan | 26:09
Yeah, exactly. And so why don't I show that right now? Let's just say that this is good. There you go. See, when you get close in, you see like our flipper has that kind of cool like, you know, hatching on here and stuff like that.
You know, it just looks a little bit different. Actually, here, let's just make it pink or something just so that it's kind of cool. There. Now I have this kind of nice pink and purple flipper. Wish I could make our ground I wish I could make the ground a little bit less.
Whatever. It'll do fine. For our live demo, I think we'll just accept it. And I think we'll just accept that. And so let's take a look at what that looks like because, yeah, man, take responsibility and make things look cool.
So what do these shaders look like? Let's take a look.
Like I say, Unity, what I love about Unity is that this shader the interface we're looking at right now, it's pretty simple. It looks a lot like Blender. You'll feel comfortable in it if you've done any 3D modeling or something like that.
And then there's just more and more stuff that kind of gets layered on that you can explore whenever you're ready to. And so let's just go ahead and do that. If I look at one of these materials, all right, the material settings that are over here in this window, it says what shader is being used to... To generate this material. You can go in and edit it. And if you edit it brings up something that looks like this. And this is the kind of interface that, again, is probably familiar if you've done node-based music stuff or if you've used, say, Grasshopper in Rhino. Actually, even Blender has a lot of node-based rendering type stuff. Where just the basic functions that you want to use are just represented as these nodes and you connect them together.
So what do mine look like? Well, I'll actually start off with these nodes that are... These nodes that are themselves full graphs that I made back here. And some of these nodes our HLSL code. Jesus Christ, I've been doing... My gosh, I've been doing this for a long... I forget. It's literally a complicated web of code that I'm so bad at maintaining. And so I don't like... Every time I... And I begin every project by going through and like saying, it'd be cool if this like looked a little bit different.
And then it's like, what kind of... What goddamn can of worms did I open up?
Some of these nodes like this one right here like custom function. This is where I get in and I write open this up and I will write, HLSL code. I am not good at writing HLSL code. I've cobbled it together. This is from various courses that I've found. But basically what I found was all that I really needed, and this kind of comes from...
You know, somebody who cares about composing images and somebody who enjoys looking at a Jacques-Louis David is just all I really need to know to make things look nice on a screen is what are the different elements of light and shadow that are happening in my scene. So I really like the HLSL code that I've written. It's quite simple. This isn't really long. And all that it does is it pulls out and it's only because like, don't get me wrong. First, I went through and I looked at what do all of the out of the box function nodes in this Shader Graph software do? Okay, and play with them. What's the coolest thing I can do?
And then after doing that for a couple weeks, and you're like, now you know for sure what you need to make and hopefully it's not that much. And I decided that what I needed to make was something that would look at the scenes lighting and it would just spit out for me, okay, what are the, give me a sample of just the shadows that are being cast in here. Give me a shadow that is just the way that colored light is falling on objects And... And I think that was all that I really need.
And then once I had a shader that would kind of give me just shadows, then I can do whatever I want to. Then I can turn that into hatch marks, or I can turn it into squiggly lines, or I can turn it into stipples.
And then once it gives me an output that is just colored light, and how much influence the color of the sun is happening on how we perceive the surface, Then I can do something interesting with that. That's all I need. That's all a painter needs to make a good image, start modeling a nice image.
So I decided that was all that I needed. It's not that complicated code. It's probably not even well-written. I'm not very that great at it. But that's what I got. And that's what this looks like. And so I spent probably a month or so learning how to do this.
And then at the beginning of every project, I spend a week going back through it and making little tweaks and adding these little features. And then at the end of the week, I'd That was really dumb and it doesn't actually make it look better.
And then I just go back to the previous version. And that's what I do. But one of these times, it's going to work. And I'm going to make something way better. And there'll be a big generational improvement in what my art looks like. And you'll know that it's because that one thing worked out.
So that's what we have. Okay, so we imported a 3D model. We made it look good. And once again, we're not really outside of the realm of 3D modeling, because if you've worked in Blender, you've messed with the shaders and stuff as well, right? And so everything that I said about writing shaders for Unity, it applies to writing shaders for HLSL as well, or writing shaders for Blender as well. Blender won't like the Unity shader graph, of course, but it will like HLSL. It's kind of an argument for sticking with high-level shader language. But if you can do that, I mean, congratulations. You're smarter than me. I just can't. I can't write a whole thing that looks nice in HLSL because I don't have that skill set.
So I'm just comfortable with what I have. Okay, so here we are. Let's get back to Unity and let's talk about how we turn this into a game instead of just a picture of some crudely... Of some crudely rendered models.
So we got to add behaviors to this game, right? And this is where I think Unity really... What's really great about this is...
So in here, all of these things that we just imported, you notice that when we imported model from Blender. It preserved the hierarchy of objects and what they were all called. And so that's really nice. And that's why I cared about everything having a good name, and so it was easy to identify. And everything that we do, everything that we create in Unity is a game object with a bunch of scripts attached to it that define their behaviors. And in this way, it becomes really easy to program behaviors on any of these objects.
So here's my paddle. I have my paddle selected here. And you see this paddle is just an object that has a mesh filter. And the mesh renderer, that's just a component where it knows to look at that mesh from Blender and render it along with these shaders. Let's add another component. I want all this stuff to work in... Because I want our flipper to flip whenever we push a button. That's going to be the first interactive thing we do. That's when this will become a game, when you can do that.
So we can press the Add Component button here, and you add a new script. And we're going to create this. I'm going to call this flipper.
So, I'm going to create an ad. All right.
And then remember what I was saying, and we're going to save this in, sure, we'll save this in live demo. Unity are C# scripts. Okay, was I nervous about that when I started? Yes, I was. Because like, I suspect this may be true of a lot of you here with us today. I learned coding by learning processing. And it wasn't until I was like a long time into processing that I realized that, okay, processing is like a simplified version of Java. Okay, so then I felt comfortable moving into Java. When I learned that, okay, Unity, all the scripting languages C-sharp, is that going to be tricky? I really only know processing. It is not tricky at all, okay? If you know processing, like do not be afraid of any programming language. It's 95% the same, like maybe even more than 95%.
So it turns out that was not a problem at all. So we added this Flipper script. Let's go and write this script. Okay, so here we are in Java. And this is what it looks like. And it looks like, if you're familiar with... With processing, this is not that common. You got start and update. What do they have in processing? Setup and drop? Same thing, same principle. Okay, so here's how these scripts work. We could vibe code it. Once again, I'm not trying to be moralistic or anything. Because I sometimes vibe code stuff in my games, but I prefer not to just because..... I like doing this stuff. And because a game is like, there will be enough scripts in here that like you do need to know where everything is. I think like, because there's a lot of working parts in here, like something like boys of summer.
I mean, geez, man, I've written like hundreds of different scripts that run in that one game. And I kind of got it when something screws up, I need to know where it is. Right.
So, yeah, As I was saying, though, it's not really hard. Here's what we want to do, alright? Unity has a really nice input system now. This is kind of new. And so we're just going to add an input action... I'm going to do something really nice where to change all the variables assigned to this, If I just add serialized field right here, it's going to show up in the GUI of Unity, and I can change the values of variables in the GUI without having to open up this code editor. All right. I'm probably going to need some...
And then the way that we're going to make this flip is... I'm going to... Look, it's already kind of... Because I've written this script before, the autocomplete is... Knows what I want to do, which is actually pretty good for this. And so I'm going to act like this flipper is on a motor. You'll see how all this works in a second. And we're just going to add force to it. And I'm going to do this instead of, if you're familiar with processing, you might be inclined to just rotate it by defining a new rotation. But because it's a pinball flipper and I want it to hit balls, I want it to actually have a force that will affect other..... That will affect other physics objects.
So... And that number's not big enough. I think I want this number just to get it started.
So there's going to be a flip force and there's going to be a flip speed. I know this.
And then the nice thing about everything in a Unity game being one game object with all these different components in it is that... Is that all your scripts can really easily see what are the other components that are attached to the same game object.
So.....
So that's what we're going to do. Okay, so I have a geez, it's kind of doing stuff too fast, but I think this is Right, what I was just saying, when this thing starts off, it uses get component. It uses getComponentHingeJoin, and it will see what it's connected to. And I want it to-- yeah, sure.
And then that's fine. I actually am going to start tabbing through the auto-suggestions because we can save a little bit of time. And. I think maybe not. Although, man, for this five codem thing isn't working out great, I got to say.
Some of these suggestions are not what I want. Anyway, all this has to do, basically the bottom line is we just have to say... When our flip action happens... We're going to say... No.
Yeah, I think that's what we're going to do. I think it's pretty simple. What I want to do. That's what I want to do. Yes, although that is wrong. I think what I hate even more than vibe coding is the AI autosuggest because it really takes me out of my flow. And... And yes, that, It bums me out.
Like, that's just wrong. That's just not what I want to do... And I think it's...?
Okay, sure, your notes, this is fine. Why are you mad? You're mad because I didn't use a capital? I didn't do this. Okay, so sorry. I think that's as boring as we're going to get, is watching someone code. I think that's as boring as we're going to get. The bottom line is, if I've done everything right, then when I go back, Two. Our code here. Then this auto compiles. And now look, over here our paddle has this other thing. Before it had a mesh filter and a mesh render, and now it has a flipper script. And all those fields that I said that we could just add, they're just there. And you can change the flip force or the flip speed, etc. Okay. But first, we need for this thing to have some physics objects.
So we need this to be a hinge joint, like we said. And this hinge joint here that no, that yes. And I'm just going to go and quickly look through. It has a motor. I'm going to put... Actually, I'll do this thing one at a time so you can see. All right, let's see if this works. For the first time, we're going to press play. The last thing we got to do, I said making interactivity is pretty easy with the Unity input system.
You see here when I made this, input action called flip action I just have to assign what button this is gonna go to so I'm gonna say that this is going gonna add a binding and let's say that this goes with when we press Face bar. This thing's going to go. All right, so now when we press spacebar, our motor should start flipping the other direction. It should actually have a slightly erratic behavior, but it should hopefully be illustrative that at least our thing is working. Is it? Is it? No. Ha. All right, let's see how this is going here. That's all good. That's all good. I don't think it's a good dance. Let's see what's happening here. Okay. Let's put some debugging in our thing. What is... This is on here. No errors on our script. That's good... Alright, so this is where I start to debug things and I say, okay, when we've pressed this... You say... Make sure that we're getting our button press in here. All right, let's see. Can we get our paddle to flip? Okay, so that's working.
So what have I done here?
We want it to rotate about this axis instead of that axis. That will help. Let's run it again. Wazzle. Hour. Target a lot.
So let's watch this. Is it?
So that's spinning. Okay.
So, all right, it's going on its own, but I think we can do a little bit better. And one second on this. If not, then we'll use the... Prebaked. The one that I've pre-baked here. Let's just make sure that this is all working.
Okay, so it just does not see our hinge joint. Which is odd.
Yes, it does.
Well, let's go to the pre-baked version then. No problem.
That's why I always have a backup plan. A lot of pressure here. Let's see what we got here.
Haiver | 45:49
While Mitchell's pulling that up, I'll just throw out here a couple of cool things that he did along the way. Coding is essentially just a set of instructions, just like any game you would play. You pick up the rule book and you're like, "Here are the instructions for how to play the game. Here's the order that your turn goes in." And what Mitchell just did was, " the steps aren't working in this set of instructions. Let me write in just a little message to myself. Tell me this if it's doing this or it's not doing this at a given step along the way," which I thought was It's really useful because you can just check in along the way with yourself over and over again. I'm curious about, so you started at some point referencing in there as you were coding the button, the action, you started referencing hinge joints and motors and those are things that are different from the object you made in Blender. Did you create those first when you were coding or were those things that you became part of when did they become part of the asset that you brought in or made?
Mitchell F Chan | 46:49
Yes, let's jump to that. That's an excellent question, Haver. And my goodness, now, look, now I've, I baked some of these cookies just ahead of time. Let's see how they took, let's see how they turned out and take a taste.
So here we go. So that's like...
So like I said, everything in Unity is an object with a bunch of scripts attached to it. And I guess I kind of then set up this demo a little bit ass-backwards. And the first thing that I had us do is write one from scratch.
Like, let's write a flipper script from scratch. Is not how you would start off doing this.
Like, not at all. You would use one and always just use the presets that come with the toy. Use the presets that come with the toy.
So the first thing that you would want to do, actually, is add on some of these scripts that already come with Unity because it's like... Because they obviously package in most of the stuff that you want to do. And so we'll look at this pre-baked cake that I made here to look at an example of that. Let me just, I'm going to delete... Let me just delete like One thing, let me get rid of these things. Let me just delete these altogether. And let's create, so you can see here, all right, We've already created our pinball machine, they got a whole bunch of bumpers all around here. And let's try to create a ball. Let's try to create a ball. All right. And so we need a pinball.
So let's go to... You go up here and you can create the many things that they assume you would probably like to create, like a sphere. And again, this is just like Blender. It's not too crazy. There's our sphere. There's our... There's our happy little friend. And our sphere, just like everything, it's just a bunch of scripts, okay? The trans, right, which are, you know, objects that are attached essentially to this game object, or components, sorry, components that are attached to the game objects. And...
So the transform is the component that gives it a position in space. And that's all that this component does. Here I am. All right. The mesh renderer is the component that The mesh filter is the component that lets it understand that there's a 3D object there, a bunch of 3D object data, a bunch of points that are somewhere in the vicinity of this space that is defined by the transform. The mesh renderer is the component that tells the graphics engine that this should show up on the screen.
And then by default it comes with this, a sphere collider, which tells a physics engine that this thing has mass, All right, and then it's certain that it can interact with other objects. Let's add another component. Let's add one of the outside the box ones. And look, there's this menu of different components. What are some of the things you might want to add? Of course, you might want to add sound effects to this game object. You might want to add blah. But we are going to go to physics. And you can write, and this is where you can make sure that And so it's very easy to make a game like Marble Madness or a basic physics game because you would just say like, " yeah, this thing should be a, you know, it should have a joint which so it's, this is a thing that rotates around." All that we really need here is a rigid body. I guess this is a term from like basic like grade 12 physics or something. I forget that class, although I do generally use a lot of grade 12 physics. That's about the extent of my knowledge in that. This rigid body component tells us that this sphere has a mass of, I don't know, man, let's just... And some other things. Do I know what linear damping is? I do not.
You know what? It just hasn't really come up. And that this will use gravity, blah. And so now this thing will be a physics object. And so now let's, let me move the camera. And so that in our game view, We can see what happens, although we can actually probably just see it in the scene view. That's fine. But let's zoom in. And let's rotate our canvas. There's our, who knows where we are, but there's, and now let's press play. And watch our ball.
Good night. It's happening. And look, it fell and it rolls. It even bounced a little bit. Okay. And that all happens because this little ball that we made here has a this little ball here. Has a rigid body component. Now watch, if I delete the rigid body component, all right, let me just delete it. Come on, man. Remove component. Now when I press play, The game. Paul. Does not fall because it is not supposed to have any physics being calculated for it. I add that component again. Add the rigid body component, And there we go. All right. Now, watch this too, right? This ground, like I said, I baked this one before. All right. Now... If I hit play. Our little pinball here falls. And, it still works. Add a something right. Watch this. Okay, now.
Look, the pinball fell right through the ground. And that's because everything needs to have the components that tell the physics engine to run on it.
So I turned off the box collider. And so now the pinball doesn't check to know whether or not it's collided with that. Okay, cool.
So what else can we do with that? Well, like I said, I baked this one ahead of time, which means that it has some of the features that I wanted to include in this tutorial as well.
Anyway, so I have set this up exactly like I described in the tutorial that we did so far, where let's look at these flippers. Ooh, that's kind of a nice dynamic camera angle. And let me just change one thing here. --
Haiver | 53:33
Can you explain the relationship between the top window and the bottom window? Like you've referenced light as one thing and you've referenced the camera as a thing.
Like why is the camera important? What is light important in this setting?
Mitchell F Chan | 53:47
Sure, great point. And this stuff will... I know that this isn't a proper Unity tutorial. And as we mentioned, that's not the point of this because there are so many good ones online. This is a demystification of the tool, right? And seeing why I like it, why I chose this one.
So... That will be clear if you go through your tutorial. This window up here that I'm making big now, this is what I see and I just move this around to get it to click on different things, to click on this bumper and see what components are attached to it, etc. And this window, right here that I'm making big, this is what the player would see. This is like when I export this to WebGL or export this to PlayStation, this is what would be on the screen.
So that's why I'm... And so obviously, you know, in the game view, you never see the camera because it's from the perspective of the camera.
And then up here in my working view, which is called the scene view, you know, I'm moving the camera around to, you know, make sure that the player will have a nice view. So that's what's going on here.
And then, you know, like these, you're composing a new scene, you got a light here and our, you know, it's, you can add, actually let's add another light. Because I went through a lot of trouble with, to make this thing be cool when you have like colored lights here. Where's my little point light? Here. In fact, I should have put a light on all these different bumpers is what I should have done. Let's make a nice bright light here.
And then, because I'm a dummy... I think I set this material up here. Do Not even care what the light color is, but let's make it care now. There we go. And to do this.
Yeah, sure. And...
Anyway, let me set up a Okay, now I'm just goofing around. There we go.
Anyway, so let's go back to looking at our flippers here. So like I said, our flippers here, they have this Right. They have this hinge joint attached to them.
So like I said, they have a rigid body. That's probably why our thing was anyway they have a rigid body attached to them that lets us know that this thing exists in a world with physics they have a hinge joint and they have this script that i prepared ahead of time which i swear is exactly the same as the one that i wrote here when i was doing it live with you guys but whatever the bottom line is i've set one flipper here to work with the z button and one to work with the x button let's take a look at our game view and let's see what happens and now we have Is our ball still there too? We'll see. All right, there's our ball. It misses it. It misses it for the first time. That's okay. I kind of like this as an artwork. I like this. But let's do something fun here. Okay, so it fell.
So you know what should happen is then the sides of this the sides of our pinball should be bouncy, don't you think? So the sides of this here, we're going to add a rigid body component and we're going to freeze their position. And we're actually going to do the same to all this. I can select all of the sides here. And add a rigid body component to all of them, freeze all of their position, and then we're going to make a new physics material, right? Because obviously when some objects exist in physics, some of them are bouncy and some of them are squishy, some of them are friction like sandpaper, and some of them are smooth like ice.
So we create, you go down here, you create a new physics material. And this physics material here, I'm going to call this bouncy wall. I don't really care that much about it except the bounciness. I don't really, okay, I guess it's on a scale of zero to one. I'm going to make this a 1, definitely going to go for a 1. And let's see what happens.
And then I just kind of put that bouncy wall material on all the walls and by selecting them up here, all these rails, you all get the bouncy wall material. All right, now let's see what happens with our ball. That ball should be bigger. It needs to be three times as big.
So that we can see it. All right, now let's see if we have kind of a fun little thing going on. All right, there's our ball. No. Why is that happening? I don't... Right. The easiest way to make a Unity game is, as you can tell, I actually don't use the physics library very often in Unity because I don't really have occasion to, right? There's not a lot of physics in any of my games. It's a great way to make a game because stupid stuff happens. We froze the position but not the rotation.
So these things had mass in the world and they were all on this kind of infinitesimally central pins. They were all pivoting around where they were supposed to go. Okay, now let's see how this works. All right, so now let it bounce. No, this, come on, man.
Well, We'll figure that out...
So let's. I've actually never seen that before. That's actually strange because it actually worked just fine. Let me try to remove this component entirely. All right, now let's give it a shot. Here comes our pinball. It's kind of bouncy, but it needs to be like more bouncy, I think. Or we need to do something interesting.
So over here, you see I made these pop bumpers and I made a new component to add to these and I called them pop bumper. What I said is that all these pop bumpers, they should, like normal pop bumpers do, they should apply force to the ball. And let's add like a lot of force so that it's fun.
And then let's add that component to our walls. And let's just see if we can create a crazy fun house.
So I have this pop bumper script and I can just drag it onto all these cubes. And now they all have pop bumper effects on them And let's see how this works.
So this pop bumper script is a script that I wrote that makes it so that when any object hits it bounces it away. Let's see how this works. Okay, you know what we need to do? We need to add more force. Let's see how this works.
Whoops, that's not, sorry, whoops, I gotta do it like this. Pop for $5,000.
Nope, that was too much. That disappeared right off of the screen, so we do it again. And we'll see.
And then we'll go into some, well, no, we're going to watch this work and we're going to try to get this a little bit crazy. Nope, that is still way too off. Okay. Right. That's right. Let's try a reasonable number like this. Okay. Okay, last try.
Okay, cool. Now this ball is kind of flying all over here. Yeah. And it flew right off the screen.
So this is the kind of thing that I love. All right. And so I want to add one more element to this. Let me bring up this pop bumper script that I wrote. To share it with you guys so you can kind of see what this is about, right? All that I did was, right, I, you know, when something collides with the bumper, it adds a force in a direction the direction opposite to where the collision is. And there's one more thing I can do, which is I think it'd be funny if every time... Every time there was a collision, we spawned a new ball. And let's see if we can do that and just make this and turn this into kind of mayhem. And maybe I'll try to contain the mayhem a little bit. By making these cubes There we go. Just so we have kind of more of a... More of a container for this.
And then We'll see what happens here.-- Change our view here. Okay. All right, so let's look into our world here and see what happens.
So now we got this All right. And our flippers work. But our flippers don't really matter when everything is a flipper. Shoot. I forgot to define what the ball is.
Sorry, hold on.
Haiver | 01:04:28
It's fascinating to see how often the loading screen shows up to, like, cache all of the assets. Like, if you're a gamer, like, you get tired of loading screens.- For SSDs, but it's true. A program, like a creator of a game as, whether as a game or as an artwork, like you have to have a lot of, even more patience, like It's like 100x.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:04:48
Yeah. No, and you know what? That's the other thing that kind of sucks about vibe coding, too.
And then, like, once again, I want to say, like, I'm not dogmatic about this at all, but the moments of, like, waiting for your stuff to compile, and then you just... Losing flow, it kind of sucks. And it's like, this is well, like, yeah, I am. I'm looking at the spinning pinwheel like a lot while the game and it's because like the game is like, you know, every script that I've touched and every component that I've touched is recompiling itself before I do this. And it does kind of suck, but it's like nothing compared to like, you know, waiting there like however many minutes. My gosh. Okay. And so now... We have, holy crap. Now we've created... A Rafiq and a doll here. Except it's way better than a Rafiq and a doll because it's like a game and I can kind of flip these balls. But, you know, and the other reason why...
So believe it or not, because I know that this tutorial is like a little bit janky, but it is based on like an idea of something that I've wanted to do for a long... Actually, it's a combination of two things that I wanted to do for a long time. And because I'm an idiot, I thought, you know those things you've been wanting to do for the last six months? Why don't you just like combine two of them into like a 90-minute tutorial? I'm sure it'll go fine. It's going to be great. But I did... For the last few months, I've wanted to make... This like kind of pseudo like Rafiq parody that would be like just like one pinball and then like more pinballs and then like more pinballs until it looked exactly like a Rafiq like particle simulation. Except this one's better because it has paddles that you can flip, obviously. But the lesson is that, I mean, just actually you know, I can do I can keep on doing this, but Ultimately, playing with your balls doesn't really change what's happening here. It actually doesn't make no difference whatsoever to this output.
And then the other thing is that in real life behind me, I've been building these kind of useless pinball machines where your input doesn't matter. And I thought, maybe I'll combine that. It'll be a fun little tutorial.
So yeah, I added a script so that these things would bounce off each other. And every time that they bounced, they would generate a new ball at 0.00. And you know, let's just do one last change and then kind of open up the question. We'll do some tweaks on requests because this is all like so freeform anyway. We might as well just really embrace the chaos here. Where is it? I just want them to spawn not at 0-0. I think that we need to find a new... New stuff. Let's just call this..... No, that's not what I wanted to... I hate this. What did the, that's not what I wanted to do at all. That's how I want to do it all. I want to make a private, I hate this autocomplete stuff, random, position And...
Okay, now hopefully we have some slightly better chaos. Okay! And then, yeah, I think that is...
So what have we done here? So far, we looked at the workflow from Blender, which is a technology that hopefully I think more people are likely to be familiar with, into Unity and got to the parts where it looks exactly the same. We got into the aesthetics of kind of like making unique video game aesthetics and at least showing you the tools that I use to do that.
And then we got into adding different behaviors to all these game objects such that like literally anything Every video game that you make is a collection of generative art scripts all interacting with each other. And that's really how I like to think of the games that I make. That's what makes it really fun for me. Stuff that we haven't gotten into that I didn't even pretend I would have time for was doing the sound stuff.
Sound stuff is really fun. And the other thing that we didn't have time for was getting into some of the external packages and library that you can add to Unity, of which I think the sound libraries is one. Where just like, you know, there's endless things to choose from, where if there's something that you're trying to do in a game, probably there's a library and plugin for it that you can plug into Unity. Find all those, and then find if there's like one small part of it that doesn't work exactly the way you want, then you can kind of figure out the tools that you need to change it, and you can usually learn a lot. By doing that.
So there we go.
Haiver | 01:10:32
Fantastic. That was so much fun. The explosion moment was incredibly satisfying. I kind of stopped breathing. I was laughing so hard.
Someone dropped into the comments here. Sweet Lord, I'm dying here. Love it. Best tutorial ever. Lots of exclamation points.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:10:50
My, thank you. Thank you. But please, we still have more time. I was just sort of my gosh.
Yeah, I just sort of like... Yeah, it was at the end of my chaos threshold.
So I need you guys to be the drivers of chaos. So please help me drive chaos for the next 20 minutes.
Haiver | 01:11:12
What can drop into the chat? Ideas for tweaks to the game? You've seen sort of what the objects can be or do. I really appreciated, while we're waiting for some of those to come in, that you really, like you mentioned Jacques-Louis David at some point, talking about the shaders that you wrote that really define what your style is. And to really think of a game space as you're lighting it and you're texturing it. As what is the surface, what is the color or quality of the light, what is the quality of the shadow, as just like these fundamental building blocks no matter what discipline you're working in. And you found a way to make that work for you in this discipline.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:11:56
Yeah, it's really... It's just really helpful to have those models for thinking. And it's like, Actually, you know what? Making graphics in a video game is actually really...
I mean, I know that it's super fun. I guess that's why I do it. But you can go back and forth between two different types of thinking.
Like whenever I'm... Especially designing shaders because yes, when I'm breaking down light and shadow, I'm trying to think like a painter. That's the information I'm trying to get out. The information that a painter wants is the same information that I'm getting. But then when it comes time to translate that into a finished aesthetics, I think like a comic book artist, like a cartoonist. I love... The art of cartooning.
Like, I love... I love how a really good cartoonist-- Because cartooning is just a process of editing, right? It's like, "Okay, I have six lines right here, and what is the information-- I have six lines and four colors. What is the information that I need to convey?" And that is just so awesome. And so yeah, that's it. And working with them, especially being not that good at a technology. Is awesome because it's like there's unlimited possibilities.
Like the sky is the limit. Like there's infinite potential. No, there are very limited possibilities for me. Okay. My potential is quite limited. The limit is very much beneath the sky. All right.
So given, right, because I am not that good at this shit. So given that I'm not that good at this shit, I got to choose very specifically what direction I am pointing and then like, you know, and then go there. And I like that. If I had more skill in this, I'd probably waste a lot of time.
Haiver | 01:14:06
Yeah.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:14:08
Not to say that skill is bad, but you know.
Haiver | 01:14:11
- Being a beginner at things gives you a certain asset that I need to edit in the way that you were describing with comic artists. Absolutely. You're not writing for like three pages for like a script for one page of comic. You're like, how do I distill this down? - Exactly.
Yeah. All right.
So one good suggestion here we got for editing this is what would the audio component sound like for this? And maybe a good place to try that might be the red bumper nodes, like the Right.
Like we've got a lot of balls flying out. If they're hitting those like, What could they trigger as? Maybe if it's not sound, it could be they could light up.
Like what is a reaction we could have?
Mitchell F Chan | 01:14:57
So there are a number of different possibilities that we can use to add a popping sound effect. I'll say right now, Because when I, but we said we won't get sound from my screen capture here, right? Although actually I'm, I have it set up.
Well, whatever. We never tested No, actually, I know that I can do it because I have a...
Haiver | 01:15:19
It, so I don't know what's going to happen.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:15:24
I come up with this problem here before. Actually, do you want me to open up one of my other project files? Now that we've done all this, why don't you...
Yeah, that'd be great. Let me show some of this stuff in action. With a game that I actually made. Because you guys really, you guys were real champs at like sitting through the, like how the sausage is made demonstration. And now you get to see the final thing. Hopefully I have this. And the best one to do this will be God. And who knows how well, no, this is fine. Come on.
Right. This is going to be fun.
Yeah, that's going to be fun. So yeah, let's open this up and we'll see an example where I use sound and come on, man. A lot of stuff, by the way, comes up in these game editors that looks really scary, and it doesn't matter.
Like, it just doesn't matter. It's fine.
Like, it was just giving me a warning that, you know, I built this on a slightly different version of Unity. Because, of course, like, they put out new builds of Unity, like, you know, as often as they put out new builds of Photoshop or whatever. And actually, the interesting thing is, so this, you know, my games are going to be archived, you know, in the Rhizome archive. And, you know, we need to preserve, like, the editor versions and all that stuff like that. But it's easy to get. There's really nothing about this that is scary, right? Is the main kind of takeaway that I think people should have here. Let me try to set up my sound here. And the way that I do that is... Output.
Thank you. All right. I think this is going to work when the time comes. Just wait for this old version of Unity to load up. Here we go.
So this is, and I don't think this was on, this was not on your close reading list or anything like that. But this was, but maybe you saw this because I kind of released this as a generative art piece here. And let me Let's see, do we have sound? Tell me. Hold on.
Haiver | 01:18:25
Nope, I got a little trumpet there for a second. But it's very quiet, so I don't know what that means. Yeah. There we go.
Still on the quiet side, but we're getting the music, the little trumpet beats and the little drum click.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:18:53
Okay.
Haiver | 01:18:55
Sounds good. That's working.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:18:58
Cool. So I was so there you go. I can flip it I can output my quiet computer or my voice One at a time, but I can't do both at the same time, but that's okay. We're gonna get through this So to the question about doing sound so here's I All these things actually, so this is what's kind of interesting. You notice that Right. This is what the scene view looks like. There's really not much in here. One of the nice things about everything being a game object, right, is that you can kind of like instantiate all these game objects in real time. This was the project that really took to heart the idea that a video game is just a whole bunch of generative art scripts altogether. And so, you know, what I did in this game is if I go through my folder, I'd make all these kind of prefabricated Assets.
Sorry, I haven't been in this folder in like eight months. So I think let me just find... Here we go. Right.
So I would have you know, these little objects like this, all right? And right, it has them. And this is really just kind of like the thing we were building, you know, I mean, literally just a little object on a platform. And if you click on this, right, I would have all of these, like, you know, within this object, I would have all these nested sub-objects and they have, they have little elements like this that tell it like what little sound file to play.
And then I would have another script that says whenever this thing, you know, comes up and clicks, you know, play the sound that's in here. I was, this is the danger too of like writing your own stuff. This is way too Byzantine. This is way too like complicated. Where like I would write a lot of these components myself and I would make them too complicated. But, you know, I have a folder of sound effects and this whole art project was about taking those sound effects, making sure that they all sync up on the same beat and allowing you to trigger them from in-game sound.
Like from in-game events. So what it looks like to answer your question is it looks like pretty much Like, you know, it looks like pretty much the other components that I added that I showed you in the earlier part of the tutorial. Do we have any more questions in the chat?
Haiver | 01:21:40
Not yet. I had one.
So this When you're designing this experience, game in particular for anybody who hasn't seen it before, right, was a part of the Xantar triptych. It had some narrative to it had some text, and the camera swings around quite a bit.
Like it is moving and shifting. Like what does it mean for you to try and figure out where should the viewer be in this?
Like I feel like Part of a game is situating the viewer not just in their choices, but in space and their relationship to the other figures in the scene.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:22:19
- - So, actually that's a great question. That's a really great question. And it's funny, this one was, this project here, Probably the project on which I did the worst job of that, because you see, I put a camera on any one of these spline tracks right here. If you can see these kind of squiggly spaghetti lines in the middle of my scene view here. I would just like, depending on what was the random hash associated with the token that was calling the game, you'd end up on one of these different squiggly lines. And the camera moves around, and it's tricky. But a better example of that is Right. A better example of that is Zantar. Let's see what happens. Let's see if it gets angry. Where Xantar began... No, I don't want to do that. That's not worth my time, man. Shit. That's a bad one. Well, that's going to have to happen anyway.
So. We can get into this, though. How do I think about putting the camera? Let me bring up some art history videos here. That's fun for us.
So this was... Like, you really get to be halfway between a...
You know, you have to be halfway between an artist and a filmmaker. And... I love, like, God, man. I love, and it's not like I'm not a big movie buff. But it's not like... The other night I watched with my family, with my kids, I wanted them to watch, have you seen this, Haver? Have you seen the Steven Spielberg remake of West Side Story?
Haiver | 01:24:26
- wait, yes, yeah, incredible. Some of the best camera work ever.
Like some of those like-- Long takes, yeah. I.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:24:34
Know! That's just some of the most beautiful cinematography. I couldn't believe it. I was just trying to entertain my kids with something that like, I was just so sick of high school musical. I was like, let's watch something old timey. And like, let's, man, like you can't be snobby about Leonard Bernstein.
Like that's that guy. He's Leonard Bernstein's a G for sure. But anyway, And like, what's a-- how many millions of dollars do you think it costs to be able to shoot something like that, right? Or is it just like, man, I guess Oscars is coming up. You saw-- I steal from Paul Thomas Anderson a lot because I love his films. You must have seen one battle after another, right? - It's so incredible.
Haiver | 01:25:22
Yeah, twice.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:25:27
And if you want, in terms of thinking about where to put the camera and stuff, an amazing exercise, compare the first car chase scene in that movie to the second car chase scene. The first car chase scene in that movie, it's very Hollywood action movie. The car, screech, tires, you close up on the tires, screech, going around. Really just quick, action-packed. The final... Car chase scene of that. It's an incredible car chase scene because I challenge you to find another car chase scene that's that tense where that it'll hold on the same shot for like eight seconds. All right. And it's like, and so it's a super long lens looking at two bumps. All right. In the road and the camera's just going to stay there. And one car comes over a bump and then you just wait and you hold for six seconds and another car comes over the bump and then you just get to watch the distance between them shrink. That's insanely intense, right? And very few people shoot car scenes like this.
Anyway, all this stuff, it costs millions of dollars. And if you make video games, you get to do it for free. Remember when I was doing that tutorial, I was like, well, let's just move the camera over here, all right, and get this.
I mean, and I know we were doing it for a stupid reason in the tutorial. It was so that, you know, I could show you the little widget working or whatever. But it could have been for a good reason. And you get to test out all of that different stuff.
So I'm very inspired by that. Now coming back to how do I think about it? This is the best part about it. Zantar, I always say, was partially inspired by this piece called Wavelength. This is a piece of video art made in 1967 by Michael Snow, who I spent most of my academic career just understanding that he's supposed to be a big deal, but I never totally understood his work. But the idea of this shot wave, the best way to understand the shot wavelength is for me to scrub through it on YouTube super fast. It's just this shot. And over the course of 40 minutes, it zooms in really slowly. All right. And it's like, it's imperceptible.
Like you'll never notice this, right? It'll zoom in imperceptibly until it's zooming in on this shot and then you're here. Right. When I designed Zantar... I was like, because so much of my work is about framing. My work is always about the frame and the boundaries. But I always want to do the opposite.
So when I created Xantar, I created it to be the opposite of this. So this is Wavelength.
And then Wavelength is considered by a bunch of people to be one of the most important pieces of video art ever made. Okay, you can understand that or not understand it. I don't know. I didn't for a long time. I'm not sure that I still do. But I was like, okay, Xantar, what I thought was interesting was just scrubbing through this film in reverse. That's way more interesting, right? And it helped me understand what this piece is about. Now I can understand this piece, Wavelength, as being about context erasure. But then when I made Xantar, all right, Xantar is a piece that's about context add-on, right? Which means really it's about context erasure, right? It's about like that, you know, a person's, we see at the beginning, what this person's worldview is. That it's just, this whole person's worldview is contained in the camera.
Like it's just this game. It's just this silly game. And I'm always thinking about how the camera moves when I write stories like this. Because I get to think about writing the script and triangulating what I'm saying against what the viewer is going to know because it's in their, because it'll be in their mind. Field of vision or not, right? And so I always, you know, I'm a visual artist. It's a visual medium. Writing is really fun for me and I care about it a lot, but I'm always triangulating against what's happening visually and how can I, it's always how can I create tension between all the different parts of the user's experience, what they're hearing me say in this voiceover, what they're seeing with their screen, and what they're doing with their thumbs. That's the exciting part.
So that's how I think about the camera, right? The camera is delivering visual information sometimes in a beautiful way, in ways I'm trying to steal from Paul Thomas Anderson and Steven Spielberg. But a lot of times it's just a tool where I get to control what visual information the person has. I ripped that off from Michael Snow, and I try to keep those things in tension with each other. I babbled about that answer for a while, but it's an exciting question.
Haiver | 01:30:01
I love seeing that, like we pull in threads from so many places. So it's exciting to see how you're doing that and thinking that through. All right. That's our Time for today. We'll have lots of more questions for you in two weeks when we come back to sit down for an interview to dig into this. Students will drop some questions in to prompt them and give them and I'll kind of organize that into what our time looks like. But thank you for, again, demystifying what this process is.
Like watching you make the pieces in Blender felt really fast and simple. And I was like, I could I in my hubris. I'm like, I could do that. And I'll fumble it.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:30:39
Out. No, but you can! Make some squares and some cylinders, drag them into Unity, and then just start, like, click on them and start, add component and write a script, and it'll do something. It'll do something interesting.
Haiver | 01:30:51
Exactly. Yep. Yep.
So I hope that, thank you again for being here. This was just really fun. And I wish you could have seen all the students' faces as they were just like cackling in response to the million balls shooting out. Okay.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:31:06
Well, I know it was chaos. Everybody, thank you for the chaos. But you know, now you've seen really how the sausage is made.-
Haiver | 01:31:15
Yeah, which is fumbling around, trying things, failing at things, iterating over and over. Which is great that's how art should always get made well great for our students we will see you on sunday for our sunday reading discussion group that's focused on the second chapter of seven days in the art world by sarah thornton if you haven't checked out that pdf it is there in the news and updates channel related to that it's about 20 25 pages takes you maybe an hour tops.
So definitely get cracking on that if you haven't yet. The richness of that discussion is based on what you bring to it.
So reading it, printing it out, underlying some passages. There are some great quotes in that chapter, some very funny quotes in that chapter.
So I look forward to hearing your thoughts on that. And otherwise, we've got two weeks left in the quarter. And our cohorts, I hope everyone's been having as much fun as I have been with the feedback sessions. They felt incredibly rich. I always find that by the end of each one that we've heard at least one tidbit, one piece of feedback that just cracks the work open in a really important way. And I hope you've been experiencing that too yourself.
So I will see you all soon. Thanks again for being here all. Cheers.