Haiver | 00:00
Hi all, welcome back. It's good to have you here for our second session with Kevin and Jen McCoy.
One thing I really admired about the McCoy's first session where they presented their body of work was the acknowledgement that organizing your body of work into a presentation makes the creative process sound very organized and structured in a way that is often not. And so I'm glad that we do the second portion in Artist Commons to make space for hearing the messy side of creativity, the uncertainty that shows up there, as well as to dig into material process and conceptual thinking to. Start to understand for how we as artists might start to move in similar pathways just by watching or emulating or following in the footsteps of more established artists.
So I'm going to turn it over to Kevin who's here with us right now and then Jen is going to join us partway into the session. She had a meeting at Brooklyn College that couldn't be avoided but we'll get both of them by the end here.
So Kevin the time is yours.
Kevin McCoy | 01:25
Hey, great. Thanks, Aver. Great to see everybody. And yeah, it's funny, the noble lie of the artist talk, you know, it's like make the slide decks and you put all this stuff together and you go, of course, we were this and then we did this and it was a logical step, yada, blah. But the reality is just like pure chaos and uncertainty and whatever when you're doing it.
So yeah, I am. And so just to kind of set the stage, I'm not at my studio. I am in my office at NYU in the art department at NYU.
Cause I've got to go talk to grad students right after this, just like last time. So this is a bit of a kind of documentation. Jen's going to pop up. She's a, she's back at the studio. And so she'll have some sort of roving camera thing, but you know, I just wanted, we wanted to talk or focus on this current, project that we're working on. And this thing is totally not done. It is still, you know, we are like iterating through, you know, ideas and, you know, kind of processes and all this kind of stuff. And, You know, hang on. Yes, there's a Zoom. Hang on, she's... Let me... Jen's pinging me now, so let me paste in this. Link for her... There it is.
So she should, sounds like she might be coming shortly. Okay.
Yeah. So there's this current project that we're working on that involves glass and glass casting and video. And so, and we're calling it crystal images. And I wanted to, talk a little bit about like kind of the background of that, where that's coming from, you know, what, what's going on with this idea. There's a lot of parts to it. And like I say, it's not really totally resolved yet, even though we've been banging away on lots of different parts of it. And so, and I wanted to kind of like off the bat, just sort of step back into this sort of thing of like, where, you know, where do these ideas, you know, come from and you know and that's always really really mysterious and kind of relates to you know, your own personal thing, you know? It's like gonna be different for everybody, you know?
So in this case, you know, so Jen and I, you know, from our kind of tour last week, you know, you kind of heard this story and, you know, a little bit of our background. You know, I studied philosophy in undergrad, Jen did film, and then we met in Paris doing film studies. And so that whole ethos of theoretical looking at film, you know, was really a big part of, and still is like a big part of like how we think about things. I've probably one book off the shelf here that I brought this, Amazing. How can I here focus it? Come on. It's got some stupid filter on it that makes it not want to focus.
Jenn McCoy | 04:21
Right, stick it in front of your face.
Kevin McCoy | 04:23
There we go. Yeah. I got to turn that filter off. That is totally annoying. Because anyway, whatever.
Anyway, so we're into this stuff. And there's totally amazing stuff in there like this whole like, this is from the 80s, that book. And it's like this whole, you know, pre-computer, like, whatever, but all this, like, way of, like, what we'd think of now as, like, a spreadsheet, you know, like, turning films into spreadsheets and, like, weird diagrams and all this kind of, like, stuff that was, like, really pretty interesting and this integration of ideas and images that was happening through those texts and a kind of structural analysis of these things, of this world of images that really, like, resonated with us, you know? And so one of the things from that, and this is something that's appeared in our teaching in different ways, is the work of this guy. Let me switch over to a desktop view here and I'll pull up browser windows, this is very much a browser Fuck. And windows so this thing this guy here he is this french philosopher his name is gilles de luz there's his name and he wrote this book he wrote two books actually on cinema cinema one and cinema two and these things are totally crazy these books are completely insane and this first one is called the movement image and the second one is called the time image and They're really interesting and really abstract in a really productive way. And so in Cinema 2, the time image, he's thinking about this era in film, European film history after the war, after World War II, and kind of comparing, just looking at this new form of thinking, this new form of visual consciousness that he sees in cinema in the work of filmmakers in the post-war period, and he's trying to understand that as a philosopher, as a kind of theorist. And so in that book, there's this chapter, we got the PDF, so we've got the whole thing, but there's this one chapter that, called Crystals of time. The Crystals of Time. And that's a cool title, right? The Crystals of Time.
Sounds awesome, you know? And this is a long text. It's like 50 pages. And in it, he comes up, there's this phrase of... Of crystal images, the crystal image. And he is kind of posing this question of this relationship between the real and the virtual that he sees happening inside of this, within the context of this concept that he's outlining of the crystal image.
Yeah. And so go ahead.
Yeah. You're.
Jenn McCoy | 07:12
Well, I mean, I think that's an interesting thing because, you know, the idea of virtuality sounds like and is such a foundational notion for the digital image. And this isn't what he was pre-visualizing at all.
Like he's, you know, he's talking about like the status of virtuality as a mental construction. You know, like what does it mean to have a memory of And your memory is real to you as something that happened, but it is not as real as the, you know, the actual present moment that we're in. And so as You know, artists who are really concerned with perception and, you know, like a cultural experience of living in reality, you know, this idea of the virtual and its feedback loop or, you know, Deleuze talks about a circuit between the actual, meaning the very specific present time and the virtual. And the virtual can be, you know, mirror images, flashbacks, you know, things that don't make sense outside of the vocabulary of cinema, even like a flashback. Back.
You know, it can be, you know, a fractured image, a superimposition. Like he could almost, you know, in the examples in this chapter be talking about, you know, very specific kind of visual effects. And he sort of talks about that as being redolent of, you How time is experienced by contemporary people, you know, that it's not just like this, like, you know, in Bergson, he talks about time as clock time is like a string of pearls. There's one moment, another moment after that. Where, and in fact, our example or our experience of reality is so much more layered.
You know, there's worries about the future that impinge upon our, our understanding of the present moment. There's memories, there's, you know, all sorts of images that are part of our memory, including things that we've seen in the past, you know, and when we talked about our work last week, you know, you could see that idea about film history influencing your own biography is such like an important and meshing experience in our work.
So I love to teach this text because You can give me more references, but it is one of the only things that I think about that discusses like, what do these. What really are we doing when we make an image?
Like what kinds of synapses are firing? What kinds of associative mechanisms are happening that make these images intelligible to us? And how do they express things that you can't express in writing and that you can't express in any other way?
Kevin McCoy | 10:09
And so we pulled a couple of, so I flashed you the PDF of that chapter. I mean, so the whole book is like, you know, a giant book. It's like 300 page book and that's part two.
And then this is one chapter of the book. It's like a 50 page chapter. It's totally insane. And so we've pulled out like some quotes from this, you know, that, just, I don't know, we like, that relate to us or whatever.
So I'll just, I'll read a couple of these here just to set the stage and give you a feel for his writing. Of course, this is translated from the French, so it has a kind of certain kind of tone to it. But he says, we can say that the actual image itself has a virtual image which corresponds to it like a double or a reflection. In Bergsonian terms, that's Henri Bergson, a French philosopher from early 19th century or the early 1900s in Bergsonian terms, the real object is reflected in a mirror image, as in the virtual object, which from its side is simultaneously envelops or reflects the real. There is a coalescence between the two. There's a formation of an image with two sides, actual and virtual. It's as if, it's as if in a mirror, "An image in a mirror, a photo or a postcard came to life, assumed independence and passed into the actual, even if this meant that the actual image returned to the mirror and resumed the place of the postcard or the photo following the double movement of liberation and capture." That's pretty abstract, right?
So, but you can kind of like, the image that kind of comes from this is this really weird conception of an image and its relationship to actuality or real and virtuality. And the fact that there's just this constant flipping, you know? And again, this book was written in like 84, right? And so there's an element of this that it's like, you mean that the virtual world and the real world are connected?
Right? You know, cool story, bro. It's like, duh, you know, but, and so there's a sense in which the world has caught up to certain aspects of this or it's made the elements of this idea are like now you know, we have a very different understanding of this text, you know, and so I think it's important to you know, recognize that kind of moment in time of it. But there's a benefit of that in, you know, kind of keeping this old text alive today, 40 years later, whatever, you know, because there's this, because it's not so locked into a specific mode of technology, you know, we can get so caught up in just the given forms and facets of like what's presented to us here. And here he's using a language, he's talking about cinema, he's talking about specific films and stuff, which is elsewhere in the book, But there's some space in that concept that for us is like interesting to think about. And it's like, you know, and I won't read these other passages, right?
You know, but he talks, he says it's inevitable. It always is this like transition from actual to virtual and what was actual becomes virtual and what's virtual becomes actual all in the context of a picture, of an image, you know?
So it's a very dynamic and very kind of strange transition conception of an image that for us seems really fun to think about, really fruitful. And I.
Jenn McCoy | 13:16
Guess that begs a larger question of like, You know, there's, you know, a very like overused term of artists as researchers and what that means to like pull in from other, you know, kinds of inquiry. And, you know, I think it's, you know, always interesting to, you know, be suspicious of this idea of researcher theory. But, you know, Kevin had a background in philosophy and I had a background in cinema studies and so, you know, we could have easily made career turns to be academics like wrestling with this kind of text and updating it and considering it from, you know, an academic perspective. And I just wanted to kind of. Put out there that I think that's very different than artists using these kinds of texts.
You know, we're not trying to correct Deleuze or answer him in kind. It's more, you know, a way to be inspired and to, I think, kind of speed it up a little bit because I find the history of philosophy very mired in like specific details and lineages, whereas artists can like grab an idea and kind of test it and practice. And so I feel like some of our artwork has been not illustrations of theory, but kind of responses to it where it's like, Let's actually try that idea.
Like, what if you actually dug into these things? And so, you know, this is a text that we've kind of struggled with for years. And, you know, I think I don't know how Kevin introduced it. I'm sorry I'm late. I had a committee meeting.
Yeah. But, you know, intro.
Kevin McCoy | 14:51
What's fun is two minutes. There was no.
Jenn McCoy | 14:55
Yeah. So the intro is we just wanted to show you what we're working on currently and kind of take you through the whole process from like, you know, germ of like a half of a half baked idea into kind of making a project into, you know, physical reality. And we're kind of like, 90% of the way through this process with this first body of pieces, but, you know, we see it as the beginning of the next body of work and we thought it'd be fun to, you know, bring you into it.
Kevin McCoy | 15:25
So, you know, so wrestling with this, let me go back to the desktop here, wrestling with this, you know, kind of abstract text and that has this provocative idea of the image, this really productive idea of the image and brings this language of the virtual, which we live every day now, but in this kind of like '80s version of the virtual is still kind of cool. The other thing that he deals with in this chapter and other places is specific film references. And so one of them that shows up a bunch is this Orson Welles film called "The Lady from Shanghai." And so this is all classic film noir American cinema. Classic, you know, Hollywood film noir cinema, you know, and which the French love, the French theory people love. They just love it. And they're, you know, they, and it's cool that they take it really seriously, you know?
So it's like this there, you know, in my mind, it's like an early example of a, of breaking the divide between a kind of high culture and a pop culture kind of thing you know and so especially those of us working in the digital world you know it's like there's a whole pop culture side to that people deal with and you can i'm sure you can you know think of artists and stuff you've seen that is you know very connected to pop culture and there's always this sense of like is it legitimate or what's the status of it or like is it okay whatever and with this theory stuff coming out of france back then you know they really were bridging that gap in a cool way. And so this, so kind of initial conceptual touchstones for us, the provocative, label or concept of the crystal image, right? Seems kind of cool. The idea of memory, you know, this transition of memory into some sort of actuality and this kind of flipping back and forth between virtuality and actuality within an image and these classic Hollywood cinema images. And so, you know, there's clips on YouTube. I won't necessarily play those right now. Play the.
Jenn McCoy | 17:29
Second one because it really does show like a kind of startling for the time, like experimentalism.
Kevin McCoy | 17:38
This one? Funhouse mirrors?
Jenn McCoy | 17:41
Yes. Yeah. No, the first that...
Kevin McCoy | 17:45
The slide?
Jenn McCoy | 17:47
This is fine. Yeah.
Kevin McCoy | 17:49
This one. This one? This one? Okay.
Yeah.
Haiver | 18:02
And we're not getting any sound if they're supposed to be sound.
Kevin McCoy | 18:06
No sound. Okay, hang on. I think I can fix it. The sound's not that critical. This sounds not that critical. It's just piece music, Blaine. I I'm going to turn the sound down now because I'm going to Do you want to talk over this, Jen?
Jenn McCoy | 18:14
Think that's better. I don't know, I guess.
I mean, I do think like, You know, there's like... You know, always this idea of like, you know, film creating a character or psychological space. But this, the fracturing of this image here just seems to respond so much to like, you know, ideas happening in painting with cubism and different points of view and, you know, a kind of like reading of the character at the same time as the action in a lot of like when we see these we'll see later these like large close-ups over over a wider shots and it's it's a really interesting direction look at that.
Kevin McCoy | 19:00
Look at that it looks so cool yeah. So these are creative decisions that Orson Welles made in making this film. And what is this, 50? When is this film? 54?
Jenn McCoy | 19:21
Yeah, maybe earlier. I thought it was more like 50%.
Kevin McCoy | 19:25
Okay, something like that. Yeah.
You know, and so, you know, and again, cinemas come a long way since then, synthetic images, like whatever. So this is like this kind of old fashioned thing. But, you know, you see the it's like looking at some sort of like, I don't know, Salvador Dali surrealist painting, right? This is this like early moment of this surrealism. Weird change in perception and conception that, you know, is kind of happening, you know, and so this film, this, you know, this as in the context of a visual narrative film, these, this weird you know, fracture an image. It's cool, you know?
So this was a... Yeah, like this part? Yeah, with the glass. Right. They start shooting through the glass.
Jenn McCoy | 20:09
Well, and this, you know, and, you know, in the deluge, it's like, this is the moment where the virtuality comes crashing down. And in order to have access to the real, the image has to be shattered, you know, which I'm like, that's kind of an amazing thing to say. And yeah.
Yeah, I think it's interesting to, you know, as someone who's looking at experimental avant-garde cinema or even not even cinema, but avant-garde personal filmmaking, like to find a narrative in which these things function and yet these sort of experimental images create I think over, they supersede the narrative of the film in interesting ways, you know, and there's, I think that's been theorized at different things. Like when does like one image become more powerful than the film that it's even housed in, you know, that it has a psychological kind of, that is not described. If I told you the plot of this film, which for the life of me, I can never remember. It's very convoluted, but it comes down to these like, you know, canonical or I don't know, like these images that kind of like, you know, overwrite the weird, you know, vicissitudes of any one script or any one kind of, you know, of actor interaction. It becomes a lot more expressive than that. I think Godard writes about that pretty convincingly where he talks about like, you know, these like objects and the power of objects in cinema to like take on more than their narrative role.
Kevin McCoy | 21:48
And so, you know, so the, you know, this interest in that text leads us to this film, this, you know, looking at these film sequences, you know, suggests these relationships and, you know, you, hopefully you can, you know, from their presentation understand, last week, this idea of a kind of double image or an image that's simultaneously two different things, or you as a viewer kind of looking one way and then another way and the artwork trying to integrate these two different points of view. Hopefully that's something that you can kind of see is like yeah, I see that's what's kind of going on in your work.
Cause that's pretty much what's going on in our work. And so, you know, so like a frame like this, you know, awesome frame. It's like, Glass.
And then there's image, this person, right? And of course, we're looking, it is an image of glass and a person.
So it's like this, you know, kind of image in an image thing, but it's like a recipe, you know what I mean? It's just like, it's like a recipe, right? There it is, like glass and, you know, the form that the glass takes and then this image, right?
So that is our guiding script for this project. And so we thought, okay, let's make glass pieces and let's figure out how to integrate images into them. And let's think about how we can bring the kind of question of the formation of those images and the formation of that glass together as a, you know, as a single kind of piece, you know, that kind of, that's the idea. And that sounds really abstract, you know, but it just kind of comes down to, You know, we think we wanted to try some things with glass, looking at this stuff and other things we're doing. It's like, yeah, it's, you know, we've done glass Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 23:38
Pieces. Do you want to show the actual work?
Kevin McCoy | 23:40
Okay. Yeah, sure.
Jenn McCoy | 23:41
So, and yeah, I mean, I just will say that, You know, I feel like there's been such like a rise in the ubiquity of screens. I mean, that's, you know, totally obvious.
Like, you know, it used to be like maybe you would see a screen at the movies and then they came into the homes with television. And now they're like attached to our personal bodies in ways that are new. And yet the screen itself is supposed to be like a completely neutral thing. We're not looking through our phone. At reality, we're looking at reality as the working notion.
So we're trying to figure out ways that This viewership can be complicated sculpturally and take on, you know, some nuance that it didn't have if you're thinking about it as just like a glass that you're looking through.
Kevin McCoy | 24:34
So here is a finish point of where we got to in thinking about these, and then we can deconstruct and take these apart a little bit. But this is a video tour of these pieces as they were installed in our studio last week. It'll be a little tour, so it'll pull back and you'll get some different views.
Yeah. They're out Starts with the extreme close-up.
Jenn McCoy | 25:03
Of the studio right at this moment.
Kevin McCoy | 25:08
Yeah.-
Jenn McCoy | 25:48
So our goal this afternoon is to kind of take you through the production process because there's, you know, as in a lot of our work, there was sort of Interesting kind of horse and cart problems to solve, which we're still kind of working through between the sculpture and the image. And there's handmade processes and technology processes that have to meet together to kind of form some hole that is hopefully more than the sum of its parts. And both software and fabrication challenges to make these that You know, you don't know until you actually try to make it. It sounds so simple when you say it.
And then you start on these projects and you're like, wait a minute. To do that, I need to learn these 10 things. And we were really interested in this process and understanding it thoroughly. For us meant that we weren't going to rely on outside fabrication.
You know, I think that outside fabrication can be a strong decision when you are executing work that you have thoroughly experimented with in a hands-on way. But I think that often our it's not a great idea to take on outside fabricators if you don't have a feel for the materials and the, the range of the, you know, the modalities that it can have yourself.
So, you know, it's not always possible. Like, you know, you sometimes need to make things with equipment you don't own, but, at least in our, you know, in our city here in New York, there were, enough people, enough places to think about, glass fabrication and we had the luxury of time to kind of start on this new work.
So we're like, okay, let's figure out glass. And the fun thing about glass is that it turns out it's just as geeky and weird as technology where people have like 10,000 opinions about doing any kind of process with glass.
So it's been interesting to engage with, you know, the same kinds of questions about clarity, resolution, you know, the caustics of how an image is put together. And you can work on that in, you know, 3D graphics, or you can work on it in glass. And it's very interesting. If not the same kind of technological consideration. There's a question. Are they built We'll go through it.
Kevin McCoy | 28:25
On blocks?
Jenn McCoy | 28:27
You'll know all.
Kevin McCoy | 28:29
Yeah, so the first thought that we had was about making these glass pieces and having them put in front of screens. And so you kind of see a version of that. And let me just stress that what you saw there is not, there's a whole, you know, we haven't, the mounting is not resolved. Every aspect of that is still in process. One of the mounts Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 28:52
Was resolved.
Kevin McCoy | 28:55
You know, so, you know, it's, that's very much a work in progress, but you can still see the basic formula of these abstract shapes in glass with these video kind of process video things behind it kind of sandwiched to the screen. And so we thought with that, our intuition for how to proceed with that was to do glass casting in a kiln casting, and to, create 3D printed forms that we would then cast in glass. I'm not quite sure where that idea came from, but that was the starting point.
So it's like, how can we make 3D printed topographies, for lack of a better word, and then turn those things into glass? And so the 3D print part looked like You know, look mold.
Jenn McCoy | 29:45
Like this. After one comes out of the up.
Kevin McCoy | 29:48
Yeah, this was after it kind of got pretty dinged.
Jenn McCoy | 29:50
Cracking these out of the mold is sort of the hardest part. But that's kind of what they look like. And so process works like basically you're spraying a relief or even like Vaseline and these can go right into plaster open face plaster castings. And it worked like a charm. I was really kind of surprised.
I mean, you lose bits once in a while, but by and large, not so much.
Kevin McCoy | 30:16
And so, you know, so these came out of a 3D printer, right? And so the first challenge for us, and obviously we came up with a solution for it, is like how to model these forms in 3D. You're jumping ahead, Jenny. I know. I'm not there yet.
Jenn McCoy | 30:31
I'm showing that one.
Kevin McCoy | 30:32
Yeah. And so that was like our first question. It was just like, how do we make these patterns and we wanted to relate them to lenses and have this kind of like lensing concept with it. And so, you know, we're not huge 3D people, you know, but one thought that we had was, well, what if we make a grayscale image, you know, kind of a grayscale kind of topographic image and then extrude that in 3D? And maybe that could be a way to generate these shapes. And so that was the first direction that we went down. And so the thought that I had for how to generate those grayscale images, those kind of optical looking kind of images was in software and to do it with a in JavaScript. And so, you know, vibe coding, you know, with Claude, you know, came up with this was, you know, kind of one of the early tools that we came up with that would let us generate different kinds of patterns in grayscale at different dimensions with some controllers on it, whatever. But this was about to make a picture that we could then turn into a depth map, right?
So that was kind of the intuition. It's like, we'll make this sort of grayscale thing and then extrude that and then try to print it. And so that was kind of the original thought. And so this was an early tool that we did. And this, ultimately, in the end, we did make some prints this way. Photoshop played a role in the end because then we wanted to kind of combine things. And so this tool wasn't the be-all, end-all. But it definitely was helpful in getting some initial things to try and giving us some different ideas and get some images produced. And so then the From this, then it was like, okay, how do we actually make this into an extruded 3D thing? And that was a whole other kind of odyssey, you know? And so... In my mind, it's like, you know, I knew that these images were grayscale images.
So that means that they were, you know, grids of pixels in which each pixel had a value between zero and 255 somewhere, you know, so it's this thing. And so then it was just like, how do we map that intensity value to a z-axis? Eight value, essentially. It's like you've got the X and Y. If you're going to translate this from 2D to 3D, the image dimensions gives you this X and Y, and then you want to get the grayscale value to sample that to make a Z, and that's it.
So that was the technical workflow in my mind. Well, it turns out that's... We got that to work. It was a total pain in the ass, but we got that to work. And so that was like a whole other, moment in, not this one. This is later. Hang on. The He's got this one. No, that's later. I want the old one. Let's see. No, wait, no, that's not it. Hey, no demo. My dear man. This is it. You're not the one I'm looking at. Don't save. Okay, that's the one I'm looking at. Okay.
So I don't want that one. I want... The spot.
Sorry. Misrun. Here we go. Yeah. Okay. Awesome.
So this thing, this was totally fun. Totally insane. It took like a week of me and Claude trying to figure out how to do Blender. And so, again, we're not 3D people, but I ended up... This is an element of Blender, the 3D app, called Geometry Nodes, GeoNodes, in which you're connecting things in this sort of visual way, right? And kind of attaching data sources to... Function blocks and parameters and you connect them and like whatever and again in my mind it was just like i need to import an image i need to have the dimensions of the image be the shape of the thing i needed to read the pixel values and map those to the height of the thing right so that was kind of like that was you know, the goal in my mind. And we got there. And so you can see, you know, this one, you know, and it just took, it took a long time. But in the end, I had this kind of really cool little tool where I could import in different images that we made, and it would auto size them and do this kind of relief thing. And I even had this little I even have this little interface where you can make changes here and it will, you know, and it will it'll change the object in random ways.
So you can kind of like dial it in, you know? So this was really fun.
And then with this, and again, this is all kind of vibe code, clod code, export that to an STL file, which is the kind of file that 3D printers use. And so this was, you know, it took us a while to get here, but we had a very, for us, a workflow that in the end was intuitive in the sense that, okay, we know that we can kind of work in this 2D picture way with these shapes, and we know that those are going to become heights, and that's going to become kind of part of the glass and whatever. And so that allowed us to think and design and create in this kind of dynamic way by making this tool.
And then that then led to these STL files, which that, where are they? It doesn't matter where they are here. They're somewhere in here... I don't know where the STLs are. Doesn't matter. They look like that.
And then sending those to a 3D printer. We don't have a 3D printer. Our friend printed them for us. But then they looked like what you just saw here.
So you can see, in fact, we have that particular one, you know, so that looks pretty good compared to, you know, what we see in Blender, right? So the translation's pretty good.
And then that becomes... The I got one of the both of them together. Do we see both of them together?
Sorry, Brent. And we see both-- is that both of them together? No, that's still the same one. Cold working detail. Here we go. Printing glass. There we go.
So you can see the...
Jenn McCoy | 38:17
The only other step in the process you're skipping is when the 3D printing was made, the question was about a process called vapor smoothing. So if you've seen a lot of 3D prints, they're often kind of like have artifacts and stair steps and that kind of thing.
So... This one is pretty highly vapor smooth. But we sort of pulled back from it a little bit because it turns out the glass is so high resolution.
Like it can pick up like a thumbprint on it. If you like touch clay, it will like print your thumbprint, that we, you know, kind of are interested in having those artifacts because they're kind of optically interesting in the glass and it's kind of cool to sort of tip your hand to the digital birth of the project because otherwise it can be when there's a project with so many steps, it can be a little bit I don't want to say opaque because that's kind of a dumb pun, but like it can be a little bit like mysterious. And sometimes it's nice to have, you know, the production process be evident in the final project.
Kevin McCoy | 39:23
And so it's definitely cool to see, you know, kind of this, to this, you know, it's, you know, again, lots of kind of time and effort, whatever, to kind of connect all those dots. But it worked. And this was the very first one, you know, and we've made some changes, a lot of changes since then. But I want to do a little bit of a detour in and talk about the glass production side of it.
Cause that's like been a whole thing, super fun thing. And so, yeah, will kind of give you this tour of glass kiln casting and what that looks like. It's pretty fun. -.
Haiver | 40:00
Yeah. - Just to jump off of, so you started with the JavaScript files, the running software making these patterns. And those very much are one pattern, but what we were just looking at in the 3D in Blender and the 3D extrusion, it sort of looks like two or three patterns mashed together.
Kevin McCoy | 40:19
We ended up combining them in Photoshop.
Haiver | 40:22
Okay. So we took.
Kevin McCoy | 40:23
These, we took that and that was kind of one realization with working with them was just like, you know, this tool was useful and it got us part of the way there, but it was, you know, it was, we wanted more diversity than just this kind of like single tool. Across the whole field. And so for a while then we were like, do we, how do we add that into the code? Trying to like bake all of that into this tool through a vibe coding thing.
And then it was just like, wow, we could just collage. We could just jam these together in Photoshop and that'll be fine.
Jenn McCoy | 40:54
Although, I mean, from like, I think it was a good process to sort of make it do like a bunch of different variety of things. But in practice, we're finding as we show these first, you know, tests and projects to people that they can be more basic. And the one that we like the best is the one that uses actually just different depths of one texture. Because if you think about like your eyeglasses, like if that were, you know, if you had an eight foot ball that was like the, you know, the convexity of your eyeglass, it would just be huge, you know, like, so the ability for glass to distort is so intense that I think that these have too much going on and Future versions we're working towards are making the screens bigger, making the glass bigger, but making the patterns more subtle because they can be. And the way they suck light into them is fascinating.
Sort of like I think it's, It's almost enough, you know, to just see the light bend, you know, in one way across one piece. But, you know, I think it's just a workflow thing. It's like you kind of have to, for us, we have to sort of build a suite of tools.
And then, you know, the next four years is using the tools and refining and figuring out what happens. Yeah.
Kevin McCoy | 42:15
Yeah. I mean, so like this, you know, this first one, it turns out it's like 10 times too tall, you know, it's like way too much going on. And so, you know, we had to go through this whole process to kind of get to that point where it's just sort of like, yeah, this is, we got to dial this way back. And that's taken it to rather than something like this, which is more, you know, I don't know, flashy, dense, all this kind of stuff. We're working more with more like proper lens simulation algorithms that are very, you know, kind of basic, these kind of simple frequency changes. And maybe you're kind of combining two of them together, you know, but it's much more subtle.
So it's going in a more, it's retracing, you know, kind of lens making history. And I think the lens thing is cool, you know, cause it takes it back to the photographic aspects that, you know, every, you know, that are still at the heart of.
Jenn McCoy | 43:08
These things. Heroic, tales of like Stanley Kubrick, like innovating, like new lens technology to shoot Barry Lyndon with candles.
Like, you know, I think that, Kind of like I think with the consumer dump of like all of this technology onto every single person that. You lose sight that technology can be like key to like a custom project. And, you know, visual art is like an amazing place to see that.
Like you see projects that, you know, they're one-offs, they're like unique, you know, uses of the technology for one purpose, which I think, you know, can be really great. Kevin, there was a question in the chat from James. I'm curious how you approach learning about new mediums like glass casting and up to begin ideating possibilities with it.
You know, that is interesting. I think I mean, I'm going to make a weird generalization, but I feel like. When you step outside your comfort zone and you have a project that is You can, you know, sometimes short circuit, like the right way to do things and make mistakes that are expressive, even though like a master. Or glass crafts person would be like, you know, why are you doing it that way? Or there's these weird cracks. Don't you, do you want them there?
Like, you know, so, I think. When you're translating from one thing or to another, you're kind of coming in midstream.
Like for me, anyway, I didn't feel like I needed to spend 10 years learning the craft of glass to be able to work with it. But I did want to like make sure that we are working in a hands-on way where we understand the process. Problems that glass has and the, you know, it's capacities somewhat.
So, you know, luckily there's classes, you know, like let's do an evening class and like figure out 10 sessions and how to get started. And the good news about taking classes is that you know, the faculty have, you know, they've been to Pilchuck, they've been like, you know, residents at different places.
So, you know, especially in New York, we met a couple people through Urban Glass and, you know, had these consultations with them. And it's so much more fun for them to be teaching someone who has like a specific project in mind and so much easier than like, hey, I just want to get into this. But it was interesting because I was taking these classes with people who were like, yeah, I want to make glass beads or I have this like little frog collection I want to make. And you're like, yeah, I've got my 3D print. And they're like, did you think about this before this class? And it's like, yeah, we've been, you know, kind of hammering down on this for a year or so.
So, you know, I think it's I mean, it's just a great benefit to somewhere like, you know, a big urban center, you that, you know, there's resources that are beyond the university that you can tap into to learn some skills.
Kevin McCoy | 46:17
And, you know, we got into, you know, interested in, it's been kind of bubbling along in the background of our work, but just the idea of casting in general, you know, which is another form of kind of duplication, reproduction thing, and it's copy, you know, so the idea of mold making and casting is conceptually kind of cool. And we've done various experiments that way. I did this whole thing, we did this whole thing with, low temperature metals.
You know, there's forms of metal, you know, things like steel or bronze or aluminum or, you know, 2000 degrees. It's this whole different thing. But then there's these types of alloys that you can do over a hot plate, you know, basically. And so we did a whole series of sculptures in the studio with these low temperature metals.
Jenn McCoy | 47:03
And I'm just like such a fan of, for one, of a better word, like floppy sculpture. Yeah.
Like I love the work of Issa Genskin and Rachel Harrison. So I mean, I think that there's just such interesting objects and hybrid objects. And I just like that. Artists who like cram a bunch of ideas together to these like unwieldy forms.
So, you know, full, you know, the making a perfect bottle isn't part of the project yet, but may get there.
Kevin McCoy | 47:41
So here's a bunch of pictures from the mold making process. It's pretty fun.
So, So the idea with this is you're making a plaster negative. You mix up certain configurations of plaster, this plaster mix and water into this slurry thing. And as you can see here, our brave little print they're on the table and so this is done at urban glass and this is they have these you know and we went there because they're all set up for this they've got these cool little boards with these clamps this is the way that people do liquid you know this is like the you know the slick way of doing of creating molds from objects so this metal table.
Jenn McCoy | 48:31
Very cool If you know, any kind of clay will work. It's just like an awesome accident that like plastic and 3D printing will you know, you can make a plaster mold out of it.
Sometimes if it's like, you know, I don't know, you might need to make like a positive from a negative and go back and forth if you wanted to do like a real object that was more, you know, that was not resistant to hold the plaster. So yeah, so you.
Kevin McCoy | 49:01
Use these. This is somebody else's. This is another person in the workshop. This is their piece. But you can see yours?
Jenn McCoy | 49:08
You're just making. That was one of my tests. That was.
Kevin McCoy | 49:11
That was your test. Okay. Awesome.
Sorry. And so you can see it's a very mechanical, very tangible, very hands-on, very mechanical process, making this little space.
You know, filling in the corners with clay so the stuff doesn't just ooze out, whatever. And then pouring the, that's later, and then pouring the stuff in.
So we don't have pictures of the actual pour, but these are pictures of our molds that, you know, kind of after they were made. And so...
Jenn McCoy | 49:44
Yeah, so these are all just plaster negatives. So you can see like that ridgy one, you know, the resolution of the plaster. And we're not just using plaster. It's a plaster silica mix. And there's a sort of more high resolution mix that you can buy pre-mixed called Ransom and Ransom that we've been using. And, you know, you can go crazy with this.
Like you can do like, you know, graphite molds, you can do, you know, milled graphite molds, for example. So there's, you know, there's a level of, you know, of glass fabrication that you wouldn't be so hands-on, you know, that would be, yeah, there's different ways that we could approach this. But this was the-- This is used.
Kevin McCoy | 50:29
What we this mold mix.
Jenn McCoy | 50:30
--accessible. Yeah, this mold mix.
Kevin McCoy | 50:34
Buy this, it's 50 pound box of dust and the UPS brings it to you and they're based in Ohio. You know, this is totally traditional, totally trad art stuff but then we, you know, I have a picture of the mix ratios. Let's see here we go, mold mix ratios Right.
So, you know, this like kind of simple little equation, you know, you have the scale, you pouring in water, you're mixing it together into this kind of thing. And then you've got this bucket, you know, of water and these different stuff, and then you're pouring it into that thing. Into that box, letting it dry out. It takes 20, 30 minutes to dry.
And then you crack the thing out and you've got, and that's what you've got with the, you know, and then that's what you got. And then the last step is this, and that's what we're looking at here, where you've got these glass pieces, and this is essentially getting ready to go into the kiln.
So this.
Jenn McCoy | 51:38
Is billets. So you're kind of making glass with glass, you're buying slabs of this stuff. And this is a good picture because it's amber. It can come in different colors. And you're just, you figure out the volume of what fits in the mold and then you can cut the billets with, you know, like a scoring and then cracking to come up with it. And, you know, ostensibly if we mess one up, we could actually recast it.
So it's a, it's fairly ecological in terms of recycling, which is kind of nice. But this is what it looks like kind of pre-kiln.
Kevin McCoy | 52:11
Yeah, and so this is essentially where you go into the kiln. I think we have a picture of the kiln, but, you know, they're just these big hot boxes and there's a whole process of It takes like 12 hours of specific heating and cooling cycles to melt that glass and have.
Jenn McCoy | 52:27
It kind of flow in. The theory of it is that when you turn on the kiln, the first part of the kiln as it heats up is all about keeping your plaster together.
So the first part of the heating process is to not screw up your plaster. And then your glass melts.
And then the second part of the process as it stays at a certain heat and then steps down in temperature. Temperature is to all protect the sanctity of the glass and then the final part of it is it sits in the kiln for several hours and does a process called annealing and a well annealed glass is something that is super stable and super long-lived if there's annealing problems these things i understand can just like kind of explode which we haven't seen yet so there's you know it's It's kind of scientific. People who are really into casting have like these huge recipe books for all different kinds of processes.
So this is one of them.
Kevin McCoy | 53:28
Yeah, so, and then, Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 53:33
Is there a process for the cold working? Yeah.
Yeah.
Kevin McCoy | 53:36
So then this cold working thing, this is from a little book, little textbook thing as kind of an example, the glass comes out pretty, can come out pretty, you know, blurry. Boggy. And so... Cold working is this term for basically sanding.
You know, it's a fancy term for sanding and wet sanding. You know, so you're kind of going at it.
Jenn McCoy | 53:59
With... Yeah, you're always sanding glass with water. And the weirdness of our project is that, I mean, people who really like glass casting as opposed to glass blowing are really happy about the sort of fogginess and the sort of honesty about the material of glass. But what's cool, and I think... I don't think glass, I haven't seen much, is that our goal with these is that we want some surfaces to be optically clear and others to be foggy. And if you do the sanding or cold working by hand, like this is, well, this is a cutter, not a machine, but a lot of the very shiny glass is just made with basically like belt sanders of different kinds of shapes to like find the surface of the glass like that. And so that's great for a flat surface, but for our textured things, it's like absolutely useless.
So what we're trying to pioneer, and there's an example of just using a Dremel and a bit. So using hand tools like these Dremels or even just like your hands and a bucket of water and some grain, you know, some different qualities of sand, we're hoping to get the texture so that the edges are optically clear and they can fully expose the image beneath, but that it slowly fades into obscurity with, you know, a more opaque look.
So it's a little bit of a challenge and you don't really see things that are like, you either see optically clear things or you see foggy things and you don't see things that blend this, but we're going to give it a whirl. So this is me using this like, crazy table saw to try to cut the edges off one of these models and it's freaking terrifying but once you do it once you're like okay i this isn't terrible you just need like a ton of water running through the saw and like a bunch of safety equipment and to just watch where your hands are.
Kevin McCoy | 55:58
And so this was like another thing that we changed. Like, first we trimmed these things off. And so you can kind of see a little bit here the-- the ragged edge that comes off of the mold, you know, and then we thought, well, we'll trim that off and make and kind of square it up. And that's what we did with this, you know, kind of with this first one. But then that wasn't the right idea, you know? And so like, you know, this one here is after.
Jenn McCoy | 56:31
That. - There's one that's like totally cut and you can see it's optically clear at the edge, but it just looked too kind of fabricated and, The ones that are gloppier around the edge turned out looking more like they were like found, you know, like those images you see of when lightning strikes the sand and then there's like weird glass shapes. But this one's a great example of what we're doing too, where it's like, It's optically clear here, but not here. Here, but not here.
Yeah.
Kevin McCoy | 57:01
Yeah. So, The, yeah, so, hang on, screen share again, hang on, I want to go back to that, share, there.
Jenn McCoy | 57:13
Okay. Thank you all for the little hearts, you guys. Very few people have seen this work, so it's nice to get a little bit of, like, love. It's been really.
Kevin McCoy | 57:20
Fun. The.
So, okay. So this, you know, here, there's a picture here in the studio. These are with the $4 awful.
Jenn McCoy | 57:29
Clear Amazon supports. Those are so.
Kevin McCoy | 57:33
So you can see the more jaggedy edge thing here, which we're kind of, which we're liking, but you know, the cabling for the videos, all just, you know, lame and these stupid, clear plastic shelves that are holding the things up totally lame. We're just like, yeah, that's not going to cut it. We needed to get them up on the wall and start kind of going through the process, seeing what they look like. But this was obviously not the solution for what they were going to look like.
So that led to this whole mountain making process. Thing like how do you get those things up on the wall and and where's solved so a guy that we know again this is benefits of living in new york and being doing this for a long time is you know you meet people and know people and there's people around new york Our buddy Eric is the head mount maker at the Museum of Modern Art.
Jenn McCoy | 58:10
All the technology and what's running it which is something we're you know we're still working on but i think haven't.
Kevin McCoy | 58:37
And he makes all of these crazy holding things for all of these exhibitions that go on at the museum. And he has this incredible little fabrication studio in the basement of Noma. And he agreed, we hired him, we paid him, but he agreed to design and fabricate mounts for us to hold these pieces. And so what's here is a number of pictures of us down in his studio below MoMA, kind of with the first test one of this cool little bracket that he made for holding these things. And so it has to hold the screen and it has to hold the glass and the glass is irregular on the top and kind of variable.
So he... You know, totally nailed it with this little adjustable kind of thing that's bent and, you know, has these kind of like fabric pieces under here.
So it doesn't, the metal doesn't touch the sculpture, you know, it's MoMA. They're like very, you know, anal about all that kind of stuff. And so this was the first, we've had one of them made. This is the first one. The reason the pieces aren't in the studio today for like a, you know, in-person tour is that we've just on Monday dropped all of them off with him.
So he's now making, you know, mounts like this for all the pieces so they're out of the studio. But you can see this process. And so this reflects a number of decisions that we were making.
You know, we thought we wanted to have them pop off the wall. You know, we wanted them, you know, we just thought that might be a nice way to do it rather than kind of flat against the wall. There's a whole ongoing conversation around, you know, around that question, you know, and so these mounts are very much designed to kind of have this pop-off thing, but we're exploring, we're still thinking through other ideas. Maybe they're embedded in the wall in different ways. I don't know. But, but we do have these cool, we do have this one cool mount and we're going to be on our way to having, additional cool mounts.
And then the, the other thing with this is the, this spacing and so we were thinking do we want to have the electronics up in here you know you got to have power there's always some kind of power cable you know but then there's a you know kind of data signal cable and some sort of device that's kind of producing this video playing this video in different ways and so that's another kind of open question so here You know, we see this, you know, kind of shitty cabling, but we're have this idea that we could run the whole thing off of these little mini computers and then have just a single cable up here. And this is kind of the direction that we're going right now is to separate the brain from the display and from the sculpture and then have just this single cable that holds the, that has the power and the video signal.
And then this has this kind of white case that goes over it. This is a little bit stripped down, but something like this could be the form that these things take in terms of presentation.
So... Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 01:01:50
In fact, you're not solving these problems until You've been invited to do an exhibition and, you know, honestly, from years of experience, I'll say it's kind of too late. By then you're like scrambling and it's like my God, we didn't like figure out how to plug this in and where it should go.
So we're trying to like kind of head off and future proof these questions a little bit by making it simple. But, you know, the addition of this computer as a way to play this video brings it out of the realm of like, you know, Micah players or bright signs or, you know, any kind of video. And it's like, well, this is video.
Kevin McCoy | 01:02:26
Digital file based.
Jenn McCoy | 01:02:27
You know, this is a this could be a live, you know, a live algorithmically run situation the way horror chases, because the intention of the piece is to kind of like grab these small looping images and, you know, put them together. Through their paces and like literally kind of preserve them in amber is the metaphor that we've been working on when we're writing grant applications to keep making this work.
So they're, you know, they're kind of little memory like nuggets or circuits, as Deleuze would say. And so the idea that a computer could be doing that just opens up a lot of possibilities in, you know, kind of algorithmic editing. And so like one version of the image could be reflected in the you know, in the patterning of the glass on the screen. But then as the image moves through it can keep finding focus and doing things in different ways.
So this first version of the project, we're working literally with images from the lady from Shanghai trying to do that. But then the next version will go the other direction. And we're starting with images that we shot and then developing glass forms to best exploit those images.
So it's a really interesting like dialogic process of like the idea and then the media and then you figure out what you're doing and then it's the right, you know, object for specific media. So anyway, it's just a weird way to cobble together an idea and I don't have a better way to do it. I feel like it's unexciting and kind of grueling to like totally conceptualize an artwork and then just go about the task of making it. That seems like the least fun and interesting way to go.
So this sort of resulted from like a bunch of open questions that were kind of like chipping away at from like two different directions at once.
Kevin McCoy | 01:04:22
Yeah. And then the last kind of component in this is this video playback thing and the fact that this is a live process. And so... These are these little mini PCs. They're like 300 bucks kind of thing. And we've reinstalled Linux on them and then have a live video process of playing on them that is written in python and so using python and open gl to do this image processing and again this is all kind of vibe coded you know together with chat gpt or with claude and it produces these outputs so these are recordings of the output so this so in this particular case you know we baked them in to the to you know so that we could use because we have these existing little video players and so as we're kind of like working through these ideas it was useful to export it as a fixed mp4 file so these are kind of just screen recordings of the software output and i'll show you the software in just a second but we're using there's a number of things that are getting mixed here, elements from the, you know, kind of quotes, clips from the Lady of Shanghai, the same algorithmic shape that the glass is making, but here applied as a video processing layer, and then these caustic reflections that are you know, kind of these like lens highlight things. And so these are kind of like the elements that are going on in, you know, in the software. And I have to say this software is still very much in progress. I'm not totally convinced we've got it all completely dialed in. But, you know, and it's funny too. It's like here they are as MP4s. Does it matter that it's a fixed video file versus a real-time computer software process in terms of the viewer's experience of looking at the artwork? And that's like a pretty fundamental question and a really legitimate question. We're finding that For us, it makes sense to keep it as live software. We want these things to be live software.
Jenn McCoy | 01:07:01
Objects. Even if it's just conceptual, I like the idea of the not quite looping.
You know, that if you stand there for a while, that you're not able to really see that it has a beginning and a middle and an end. Like, how can something move through time, but not like... Progress.
I mean, that's a good life question for all of.
Kevin McCoy | 01:07:23
Us. Move through time, but not progress. Let's see if we can't... Let's see. Let me see if I-- I haven't tried to get this going here. Hang on a second. Nuts. There it is. OK.
Jenn McCoy | 01:07:53
Too many P's.
Kevin McCoy | 01:07:55
Thank you. I'm trying to type. Wait, I don't want the old one. I want the not old one. I'll do that. Come on, baby. Rippler. There we go. And I think Haven't tried this in a while on this. Is this machine even set up to do this? Let's try. Let's see what happens. What could go wrong? It's going to do something. Come on, baby.
Yeah. Something should definitely be happening.
Yeah, something should be happening. And it's not.
Haiver | 01:08:42
While you're troubleshooting that, I thought it was really interesting that.
Kevin McCoy | 01:08:46
You... There we go! Something's happening! Yay! it's playing. It's got a different video file, but that's fine. Whatever. It's working. There's some live. Good.
Haiver | 01:09:03
I just want to let this play for a second and enjoy it.
Kevin McCoy | 01:09:06
- This is not using clips from Lady of Shanghai, this is using clips from concerts that I went to, zooming in on the lights, Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 01:09:20
I mean, it seems like light is an important subject matter in this project. So I think we're going to explore like you know, in future iterations, kind of the narrative capacities of just like light sources in the world, suns, you know, moon light. Inspiration, light moving through glass, light moving through water. Light reflecting off of things, creating virtual images.
Kevin McCoy | 01:09:48
Yeah, I mean, so there's a number of things in this example that are kind of pointing to kind of the next stage. I mean, you can see the... Shapes that are much more subtle.
You know, it's much more like looking through a shower door or something like that, you know, kind of textured kind of thing. So it's more subtle. These equations are kind of directly coming from more lens making kinds of things.
So it's this kind of interference pattern, two different kinds of lens formulas. And then there's this kind of coloring going on and different kinds of caustics and whatnot, and obviously a very different subject matter. But the, But it's all live, right?
So it's this Python script. And so, you know, the... The show mode, the kind of presentation of it means you've got that little mini computer, you've got Linux on it, you've got, you know, it's loaded up with this Python app that's designed to kind of auto start when the machine starts up. And so it kind of like launches into this thing and it's kind of continuously running. And the way that this works and this, and again, this is all a long process of, you know, that's Vibe coding in collaboration with Claude and, or ChatGPT, and it reflects certain styles of working that make sense for us, you know? And so in this particular case, the software has a lot of different parameters to it. You kind of slowly kind of work through these ideas, you know, kind of discussion, you know, around, frequency, scale, color, you know, all these kind of like attributes that you kind of think about and kind of slowly add into as capacities to the app.
And then you've got to, you know, there's not a UI to it. It's not a GUI. This is like a terminal-based application. And so you need some way to configure it to kind of dial in a specific set of parameters and properties that produce a given effect from your app that can do a variety of things. And so one way that we handle that is through some kind of configuration file that specifies all those different attributes. And so that's what all these things are configs.
So, you know, we can... Just pull up one. How about that? To kind of give you a sense of it. It's just a text file. There's nothing magic about the way this is set up, but specifying one of the kind of processing plugins that in terms of the script, kind of a module within the script pointing to a certain source file, you know, One of the, you know, kind of one of the fragment shaders. This is a WebGL thing.
So that's what the fragment shaders are. Video playback, you know, you can flip it, you know, whatever.
So all these kind of different elements that are specified with this. And so...
You know, you can kind of, and again, there's a lot of parameters here. It looks really like, whoa, what the fuck? But this emerged gradually over, you know, our approach to code is always like, get the most simple thing to work. Can I get the video, a video file to show up on the screen? Yay, I got the video file to show up on the screen. Hooray. Can I get it to and I add a color overlay to the video. Yay, I got the color overlay working.
So it's just this like incremental, like boom, iterate kind of thing. And then eventually down, you do that for a couple of weeks and bang away at it. You get to a place that's pretty complicated. And so- You know, the risk with this too is to get too overloaded with parameters. And so this is something that definitely, I think, and that's kind of like a downside of the vibe coding thing because it's just like the AI will just be like, sure, let's just add that thing in, you know, and you just get a lot of...
You know, parameter creep. And, you know, so trying to like get to where you can, you know, you're developing this instrument and you want to kind of be able to explore that instrument and get a sense for it, a feel for it, you know, come up with like stuff that makes sense, looks good, seems relevant, whatever. And that takes a long time. It takes, it was a whole kind of process with that. And so you have to kind of keep a lid on the parameters, you know? And so, but coming up with these config files is a, we found is a nice way to do it because it gives you a you can save them, right?
So you can kind of save different versions. So you can remember what you did and whatever. Save it before you break it.
Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 01:14:56
We should leave some time for questions, right, Haver?
Haiver | 01:14:59
Yeah, that would be great. I am. This is wonderful. Thank you so much for doing this.
So I was struck by I was reminded of several quotes by different filmmakers as you were talking about this process. Like at one point, right, Orson Welles, who directed Lady from Shanghai, said a writer needs a pen, an artist needs a brush, but a filmmaker needs an army.
Kevin McCoy | 01:15:20
And.
Haiver | 01:15:24
Somehow you've managed to make so many, like there are so many steps clearly in this process. With a couple, you know, key friends coming in at key moments to help and contribute a component. But what does it meant to build this practice that doesn't require an army per se?
Kevin McCoy | 01:15:43
Well, it's interesting. I think that we, I think kind of to a fault have been like, let's just try to do it ourselves. It kind of like mom and pop. Approach because there's real benefits from bringing people in that know how to do stuff. And we certainly have done that. There's been key times and like whatever, but our default I don't know. We're like, or something. It's just like, let's just do it. Let's just figure out how we can do it.
Well.
Jenn McCoy | 01:16:11
And I think like, It's sort of, you have to kind of come back and forth to it. Like when, you know, when we've hired fabricators to do things, like we did make some glass with a fabricator several years ago. And there were things that Had I known what I know now, I would have like questions better like that I was willing to be like, she can't do that.
Like that's not going to work. And it's like, well, it can work, but it just needs to be conceived of in a different way. And I just think you kind of like shut yourself off to that a little bit if you don't go down the road somewhat. Yeah, but I think it all has to, I mean, I think what's cool about.
Well, I think filmmaking is becoming this way too, but like it can scale to the budget, you know, back when nobody could afford a film camera, it was really limited and you were waiting around for, you know, the green light for funding. But, you know, I just talked to a guy who made a film who went to Cannes and the film cost him $7,000, you know, and the film he made before that was like a $3 million film, you know?
So it's interesting that, you know, people can scale their production and ideas to do something that can have just as much like weight, even if it's like kind of DIY. So I don't know. I feel like there's no rules.
Kevin McCoy | 01:17:34
Yeah, you know, it's like, what do you want to do, you know, and it's like, how do you want to spend your time? And I mean that in a positive way, you know, it's like... There are no rules. You can be like, I really want to get into this.
You know, I'm going to make my own paper. You know, I'm going to go out and get, you know, pick up trash on the street and I'm going to put it in a bag and I'm going to bring it back to the studio. I'm going to soak it in a vat of water for a month. I don't know what I'm going to do with it, but it might be kind of cool. I'm going to let this like pulpy paper sit there and then start, you know, figure out the like turn it into like handmade paper.
And then I'm going to run that through my inkjet printer or like whatever. I don't know. It's like just, try it. I don't know. Fun. Does that seem fun to you? And again, I don't mean that in a provocative way. It's like, that sounds kind of fun. Could be fun. Let's do it. Let's try it out. Let's collect a bunch of aluminum cans and figure out how to melt them down with a blowtorch or buy some charcoal at Home Depot and figure out how to melt them down and get some melted you know, aluminum can thing going on and, you know, shine a laser at it or I don't know, whatever, you know?
So it's just like whatever you want to do that seems kind of fun, you should, and interesting and a kind of course of action that is, cool that resonates with you should just totally do it, you know? And, you know, and so, you know, I don't have enough insight into you guys all individual practices to, you know, respond. Or specifically to what you guys are doing.
So I don't know how digital you might be, how traditional or kind of hybrid or whatever, but it's just like, the world's complicated place. It's like even the most hyper digital kind of thing, it's just about AI and these algorithms and agentic and processing. It's like, even then you're still dealing with physical reality.
So it's like physical reality is still there. It's not going anywhere. Materials aren't going anywhere.
So it's always gonna be back and forth. In some kind of way, you know?
So it's like just... You know, have fun and have an idea. Think of an idea. Your one job is to have an idea and your other job is to pay attention to the world and like, you know, frame it in some way. Pay attention to the world. Have an idea. Frame it out. Who knows if it's going to be good or not or suck or be relevant, but just do it. It's fun.
Jenn McCoy | 01:19:59
Yeah, I feel like on the other side, I am kind of constitutionally lazy. And so whenever I say to myself, well, I could do that, but it would be a lot of work. I kind of go, okay, I will just do it because I just don't want my laziness and shortcuttery to like. Hold the work back, you know? And so like, especially if you have to do it again, like if something happens and it breaks and you have to start over, like you lose an animation file or any number of horrible things, your computer dies is usually a big one. I find that doing it the second or even third time goes much faster than doing it the first time. And I just never want to be like, I'm too lazy to make that happen. It's like, no, I will get up and do it eventually.
So to like kind of argue with my own voices where it's like, well, you know, And, you know, often we have found that the reason why nobody does these really obvious ideas in culture is because they thought it would be too much work. And if you're the one to just do it, like I know I'm going to database an entire television show, then you will be out there alone because everybody else thought about it, but they couldn't be bothered, you know?
So it's not even just about being original. It's about just kind of sticking to it.
Kevin McCoy | 01:21:18
I mean, and I think that's even like doubly true in the sort of like AI apocalypse era that we're kind of going into, even when, you know, the AIs can do everything and like, what about us? And like, you know, we're deeply in that world. It's like we know kind of what that reality is, we're doing it. But even then, it's like most people don't do it. Most people don't deal with it at all. It's like there's still that gulf between makers and doers, you know, producers and consumers. And I don't mean that in some like there's some moral weight to it or whatever. It's just a kind of basic description of the world, you know, and it's like most people can't be bothered, you know, and presumably your guys have self-selected as like, I'm going to be an artist. I'm going to make these things called artworks.
You know, it's like that. Pretty much puts you in the doer category, you know, so you got to just do it.
So it's already you're in a minority, you know, and so just like lean into that, you know, just do weird shit. The times that it's like, you know, the times that we played it safe, no one cares about the work. The time that we just did like the most weird ass thing that took forever and was a complete pain in the ass was like people were interested. It's like, wow, that's cool.
Like, you know, it's like with these pieces too. It's like we show them and I don't feel totally convinced we've dialed in every kind of component. It's like there's still a lot of open questions, but people come into the studio and look at that and they're just like, what am I looking at? I've never seen anything like that. And you're like, yeah, I know. It's kind of weird.
You know, so it's a fun spot to get to.
Jenn McCoy | 01:22:47
Kevin, there's a question in the chat from Nat. Started incorporating AI into code after resisting it. I noticed you mentioned the parts that were vibe coded. Do you think you need to say that? Does it feel similar to hiring a friend to make the mounts? Any thoughts in general about attributing credit to AI models?
Kevin McCoy | 01:23:06
Yeah, I mean, that's an interesting question. And it's funny because it's, you know, we're old and, you know, we're around when, you know, Photoshop kind of emerged and the question of like, framing that, you know, or even like the whole like analog to digital thing. There was a whole, in the 90s, that was some whole holy war of analog versus digital. And you had to kind of say it was this or that, and that was all important.
You know, and then that kind of goes away as an issue. And I think that that's going to happen with AI. AI enhanced production is going to be just sort of how things are done, right? But I think that we're in a transition point where we're kind of talking about it. But again, I think for this conversation now here, it's important to-- I think that it's useful to mention that fact of vibe coding. My we've done a lot of coding along the years but it's completely self-taught and it was you know we got we were able to leverage a lot and kind of slowly painfully make stuff happen with code over the years and have built up a certain kind of skill set you know with it but it's absolutely the case that these ai tools now in the last 18 months have just elevated and accelerated what is possible for us to do, you know, so it's a great accelerant in a positive way. And so I felt that it was in this conversation important to foreground that just to let you know that we're doing that and that we're, you know, and it's kind of, we're finding it to be a useful part of our process, our thinking process.
I mean, there's a whole lot of conversation to be had about the stakes of outsourcing that cognitive labor and stuff and the effects of that. I mean, it's not a cut and dried thing, you know, there's a lot to say. But, you know, but in this context, I thought it's useful to kind of point out the vibe coding. In general, I wouldn't talk about it. I wouldn't foreground it. I wouldn't like one, I wouldn't kind of credit it.
I mean, it's just, to me, it's just sort of, kind of pointless to do that.
Jenn McCoy | 01:25:15
- Yeah, it starts to be like, you know, the company that made the pencil was, you know.
Kevin McCoy | 01:25:20
- Yeah, the delivery guy that brought me the computer, you know, it's like, thanks, I appreciate that, I needed that, you know, but it's like, you can't, you know. Can't do that all the time.
Haiver | 01:25:30
Right. One last question here, and then I'll have some closing thoughts to prepare us for next week.
So, You mentioned earlier about how boring it would be to have something so planned out ahead of time to not be discovering along the way. And it reminded me of this Hitchcock story about how he was so bored on all his film sets when directing. Hitchcock is famous for directing Psycho and Rope and... Rear window. Too much.
Yeah. Rear window, the birds.
Yeah. Great movies. A lot of thrillers. But he was notorious for planning everything out in advance, like storyboarding it and like working on the script and his creativity happened there. And so it was interesting to hear you talk about the desire to be able to explore along the way. And so I'm curious, you started with the Deleuze chapter and talking about that. But with all of these many fitting together pieces, where did this, what was the actual start moment?
Like we want to work with glass, we want to put images through opaque materials, Where did it actually start?
Jenn McCoy | 01:26:48
I mean, I have to say it was kind of the marriage of a lot of those things and, you know, and just Thinking about, you know, the moving image as object, like what Part of that have we kind of not worked on recently or yet, you know, and trying to sort of, you know, think about the work we make and not. Be content with sort of received information about like what the sculptural form should be and ways to innovate that. And so the fact that screens are glass became really important. And like 3D printing is pretty interesting, but I don't love the plastic of it.
Like I, unless it's kind of about mass production or replicability. So I think the sort of handmade and high tech convergence is always like a fun thing. Interesting place to put things. Yeah. But I think the spark is just like, I mean, you know, you're a film person and I know film people. I think it's sort of a deep kind of like debt to like filmmaking as a thing. And maybe a little memorial to it because the way film is understood is in such like glimpse looping, you know, tick tock, like I mean, everything's becoming video.
Like even my Instagram is half video clips now, but the idea of like, Capturing it and freezing it and not having it just be this endless like churn, I think, is kind of the first motivation to making these as sculpture.
Kevin McCoy | 01:28:30
But, you know, just to push back on the and on the premise, you know, a bit. You know, it's like, maybe there is no origin, you know? There's no starting point. It's like, I mean... No, here we I don't know.
Jenn McCoy | 01:28:44
Are. Cocaine-fueled conversation.
Kevin McCoy | 01:28:48
Well, look, I've got my little window. My name's on it, Kevin McCoy. Jen's got her little window. There it is, Jen McCoy. I got her little name on it. But you have to work as Jennifer and Kevin McCoy.
So it's like, she'll be like, here, Jen, you can move over. Other direction. Other direction. Other way. Other way. There we go. There we go. Go closer. Go closer. Really different.
Haiver | 01:29:08
I don't think your window looks like our window.
Kevin McCoy | 01:29:11
Okay, I'm just entertaining. But yeah, to push together.
So, you know, and I like going back to like that Deleuze quote where it's like the image is this incessant oscillation between the actual and the virtual. And it's just like, well, which one came first? Is the virtual the first one or is the actual the first one? And it's like, no, it's an endless oscillation.
You know, so there is no origin. There is no starting point. It's just this, the image is this unstable kind of thing, you know?
So- I don't know where these ideas come from, Who knows? Don't do them. The gods. The gods.
Haiver | 01:29:43
Spoke. Yeah.
I mean, it's funny. Even the moment Artist Commons became a thing, it was such a clarifying lightning bolt moment of just like, These things will fit together in this way and it's going to be a year long program. It was the evolution of.
Kevin McCoy | 01:29:58
A... Well, it goes back to what I said about paying attention to the world. It's just like this weird idea kind of like drifts in, you're looking at something and you kind of go, well, that's weird. And, you know, do you just scroll on the doom scroll or keep walking down the sidewalk or do you let it impact you?
You know, do you take it seriously for a moment and then like actually consider it? Most of the times you don't, that's fine, you know, but sometimes you don't. Stop and kind of go. It's kind of weird. What if, well, that's weird. What about that?
You know, and so that's the idea, you know, and so you have to be willing to pay attention to something at some point in time in the endless stream of stimuli. And, you know, why that particular idea where it particularly comes from, it's harder, much harder to pin down.
Haiver | 01:30:43
Yeah, completely. Well, thank you so much, Jen and Kevin, for putting this together, taking us behind the studio door to see the process on this really fresh and raw work. It's really exciting to see.
Jenn McCoy | 01:30:56
It's great. Thanks so much for taking a look. And we'll see some of you. In a week.
Kevin McCoy | 01:31:02
Right? Yeah, we'll see you next week. You can pepper us with questions and we can... Stop talking for a.
Haiver | 01:31:07
Month. Exactly. I'll just say this closing note for our community, which is next week I'll be interviewing Jen and Kevin on camera. Please send us your questions as you have them. Drop them into the chat and I will start. We'll see you later, Kevin. Thank you for being here. Please drop those into the chat and we will I will start organizing those into an order that makes sense and mixing in my own with it. But this is a chance for us to do a really candid conversation, right? This is a closed space, right? It's not public. And therefore, the way we get to talk and get answers to our questions are very different from if this was a podcast or if this was in a, you know, on a college stage where anybody could have walked off the street or bought a ticket.
So I'm excited for what that conversation opens up to talk about specifically what it means to build a long-term career in the arts. The way we've structured these three sessions with our visiting artists, and we'll continue to do so throughout the year, is we start with a presentation that outlines their body of work and the arc of that body. The second is this craft workshop. And the craft workshop really focuses on the how of making, getting into the nitty gritty, the brass tacks of doing that.
And then the candid interview is really about what it means to build a long-term career in the arts, to talk about the business of art, which we haven't talked a ton about. We've talked mostly about creativity and process and different art projects to try and help us think about, this is how working established artists think about art, how can I bring that kind of thinking? Or where does that align with the thinking I'm already doing in my own art practice?
So next week is about turning to the business side of art. We will continue to have a lot more lectures and panels dedicated to that in the second half of this quarter and increasing throughout the year as we move off of pure just meaning making and how do we see.
So I'm excited to get into that with you guys soon. Thanks for being here. And we'll see you in the app soon. All right. Bye all.