Speaker 1 | 00:00
Good to see everyone back. I know we've had a couple of really good days of cohort feedback sessions, and I'm really excited for the next two. We're going to start here. In a week and a half, we finish going through our presentations of what we're We've been working on as artists and we start talking about where we're headed right the things that we are making currently the things that we could use help with. Figuring out how to workshop and push our practice forward right that's why we all signed up for this, I think, in a lot of cases, and so i'm excited to help us lay out a structure for how we're going to organize our time when we start presenting work. Many of you have probably been at some point in a bad crit or a bad critique session in which people give a lot of opinions and you walk away just as confused as you walked into it, not sure where to take a work. You walk away with some really negative sentences that you hold on to. I certainly am full of sentences that people have said to me over the years about my work that it's been over a decade and I still hold on to those.
So how can we frame our time and the way we spend our time together to make sure that we are doing something that is constructive that we're speaking language that's actionable and that we're supporting your growth as artists. And one of the first things that we did when setting up this program was we threw out the word crit. We just got rid of it entirely, which is very funny because I called this lecture how to crit better. But for us, we are interested in what we call these cohort feedback sessions. That's what they're designed for. We're getting feedback from the people that we trust or are building trust with and going to continue to deepen in that over the course of this year.
So let me pull up my slides, and we'll dive into what this structure is going to look like this year. Okay. Can I just get a thumbs up that we're all seeing the title slide of this thing? Great. Love it. How to crit better, or for us, how to give better feedback as we keep going.
So. When we go into this, we're making four core agreements with one another. The first is we're assuming goodwill. We're all here to help each other grow. We're not here to hurt each other. And if we are fumbling around with our words, it's because we are in the dark and struggling just as much as you are as the artist figuring out what to make and how to make it.
So we assume that people are speaking in good faith to one another. The second is that there are multiple readings that can coexist simultaneously about an artwork, right? Your interpretation of an artwork is just your viewpoint. It's not the truth. It's not gospel. It's not the final word on a thing. It doesn't matter what your experience level is here.
Right? We can... We are learning from a multiplicity of perspectives. That's what we love about cohort-based learning. When we are speaking, our goal is always to be precise, right? To give specific beats. To be specific, which beats being vague every time. And the last is to be confidential, right? What's shared in our cohort stays in our cohort, right? It's that trust, knowing that things stay in that space that allow us to be vulnerable.
So for participation, we have a few key guidelines every time. And you're going to hear this many times throughout this year. The first is no monologues. We cap any single comment to 30 to 45 seconds. This is because it's important to hear, again, from a multiplicity of voices. And to make space for that, we have to be short in what we say. The second is that We're raising hands when we would like to offer feedback or respond to one of the prompts that you'll see in the structure we're doing. I added into Zoom, if you navigate to the bottom, there is now a raise hands button that's there. And so the order that your mentor sees your hand get raised, that you'll get called on in that order. But please bear in mind that it's important for us to hear from everybody in the group.
So don't raise your hand a second time until you've seen that everyone has gone at least once. Brings us to our third participation guideline, which is for our quiet members in the group, quieter members, you should commit to at least two contributions per presenting artist. Each presenting artist is getting 45 minutes for their feedback in this first go around as we continue to experiment with what the structure will look like for our cohort sessions.
So in that 45 minutes, please chime in at least twice. We want to hear from your perspective. It's part of why you were put in these cohorts is that I and Laura felt that you had something really important to be able to share. With your fellow cohort members. When your cohort feedback session that you are scheduled for comes up, right, and you get to present your work in the cohort every five weeks, you should post it in your cohort session chat. Share it 24 to 48 hours before your feedback session. The important thing here is don't share any text or explanations. And we'll talk about this more in a little bit, but the goal here is to make sure that people come in neutral to the work, that you're not automatically skewing them to read it one way or another. That is such a rare privilege to get to hear what people will say about your work when you're not standing there. And so we're trying to set up the first third of our cohort feedback sessions to really give you that opportunity to hear that unbiased opinion before we start talking about intent and meaning, which we will make space for, plenty of space for. But when sharing your work, make sure whatever links you're sharing, that there's no text or explanations on the other side of that. Are feedback has several key components that we want to include. Every time we're speaking.
So we want observation. Right, to name what you see and hear and/or here in the artwork. This is where we started with visual analysis several weeks ago. The second is that what we say should be evidence-based. What is it in the artwork that is causing this response in you. To be able to name it isn't enough. We have to draw it back to the artwork and ground our observations in evidence. We want our position, our perspective to be defensible, if you will. It makes it easier to hear, right, to receive. You're like, no, it is in the work. I did put it there. I guess this is true then, right? Evidence helps us prove or back up what we're saying. The third is to name the effect. What did... Your Right. It made me feel this way. It made me uncomfortable. Again, we make art with a goal often of having some kind of effect on the viewer. And that's really important for us to draw out and name. Because often we make art in a fugue state, right? We don't know why we make what we make often and our experience of it is so tied up in the process of making, the labor of it, the number of hours and the sweat and tears that went into it.
So, It is very difficult and takes a long time as an artist to get to a place where we can ourselves Pause it. Accurately what the effect is of the work. And so it's really useful as we're giving feedback to name what that effect on us is, because that's not what the artist's experience is. Their experience was in making it. And the last is we're driving toward explorations, right? A question or a next step. That we can try. The goal is to always walk away from the end of our cohort feedback sessions knowing that there is something we can do next. And that'll come from a mix of asking questions, posing questions, and then Coming up with explorations, experiments to try next. It's really important in a cohort feedback session the language that we use to talk about art. And Because it's vulnerable. Again, we keep coming back to this word, but it doesn't stop being true. All right, so there's a couple of ways to phrase our feedback. That soften the blow, especially things that are hard to hear. But make sure that this is just one of a multiplicity of perspectives.
So one of those is that we use I statements. I notice or I'm confused by or I'm curious about. This would be in contrast to saying things like, "The work is confusing." The work may or may not be confusing, right? This is your perspective and your experience of the effect of viewing it.
So we don't talk about what the work itself has done on its own in that way. We talk about I experienced it in this way. Thought this when I saw it. I'm curious about this. The second, as we've talked about, is to back up your perspective with evidence. Because the lighting does this, I read this work as doing blank. The third, we don't use certainty language in cohort feedback. All right, these are words like obviously. Obviously, the artwork is doing this. Again, this is your perspective and it's not necessarily obvious to everyone. The same goes for words like "always" and "never" or Everyone will is a phrase I've heard in a number of crits. When people see this work, everyone will think, Again, there's so many different perspectives.
So in a lot of ways, you could say a lot of these language things are rooted in the eye and recognizing that we're coming from our personal perspective. And the last is to use words like perhaps or might or one possibility.
Right? We never say things like, "You should do blank." There are many paths an artist could take, and the language we use should open up that path of possibilities. If you've ever been in a crit where somebody said, "You should do this," and you immediately you know, shivered at the thought you would Shut down in that moment. You would ignore most of everything else that person had to say. I found in my own experience as a curator when doing studio visits that the power of the word perhaps is so strong. Perhaps you could do this or perhaps you could do that. And the artists can pick and choose what resonates with them in that moment.
So other words like you might do this or one possibility here. Recognizing that there are going to be several possibilities laid out.
So. I love phrases like, "I would be curious to see what would happen if." And again, we just open up that path of possibilities rather than shutting down creativity. It's really important as well that we are critiquing craft choices. And not the person. This includes not critiquing their motives or taste. To critique their motives would be to say something like, When I look at this work, you're afraid to explore And you can answer that for yourself. Or "you want attention" would be an accusation. And we've all met art school kids who like the lifestyle and presentation factors of being an artist, perhaps as much or more sometimes than actually making the art or making good art. But we are here to talk about the work itself and to help people grow in their practice.
So we don't talk about, we're not trying to psychologize the person and talk about their motives. The second is that we don't want to speak out of a critique of taste, right? I don't like digital art or I don't get abstract art. Those sentences, they are not feedback and we are here to offer feedback, right? Those sentences are centering yourself in that moment. And what we're doing in the feedback sessions is Not about you if you're not in the hot seat as the artist that week.
Right? We're here to give back to them and to say things that are constructive and helpful. When we do critiques, and this doesn't get emphasized enough in any kind of feedback session setting, right? The artist has several rights, and it's really important that you feel empowered as the artist as you're getting feedback.
So artists can ask for what they need. You can request more notes on the craft of the piece or to talk more about the meaning of the work or to simply say, I would like more time for questions here. You can change and pivot as needed within the structure. The artist doesn't need to respond to all feedback. This is so important. Right, the goal here isn't for you to end up in a situation where you're defending the work or defending yourself or your choices. The goal here is to hear a number of perspectives that are not your own, to get outside your head and see the work as other people see it.
And then to walk away with some actionable feedback and next steps that you can take. So if something doesn't resonate with you can simply say noted and move on, right? There's no debate required. You don't have to stand up to every comment and make sure that you're perfectly 100% understood in what you're doing. And the last thing here, artists always have the right to hit pause. You can always pause the feedback session if it becomes unproductive or unsafe. You can write, this is here for you and to support you. And we're not here to break you down. We're not certainly not here to hurt you. If you feel like it's moving into a position where it is unproductive or unsafe, you can just stop it at any time. That is 100% legitimate and fair thing to do. And your mentor, me in this case, we'll sit down with you and work through that after.
Yeah. The artist always has power, right? The feedback session is for you. We are for you. We are here to help you get out of your head. To help you see your work more clearly, to help reveal that there are a multitude of perspectives and relationships to any image. The goal is better next steps, not perfect consensus. Yo. That takes us to our structure. This is our eight step feedback framework. This is what we're going to do in 45 minutes, twice every cohort feedback session starting in a week and a half. By the time we get a few weeks into this will feel like second nature. It'll be a little bumpy at first because there are several steps here to learn what are we doing in them, what are the goals of doing them.
So honestly, it's going to take me longer to explain this than it is for us to do it in action. And I think that is very funny and I'm okay with that. But come along with me on this ride as we explain what we're doing in each section and why we're attempting to do it. But as a broad overview here, which is really important to get before we get into the weeds of it. We always start by setting up the artwork in a minute or two, which is just a simple framing of what are we about to see. We're not explaining it yet. We are simply helping people know what they're looking at, not why they're looking at it. Then we take two minutes to do a silent looking session. We just spend time with the work itself. I think as you've been seeing over the last three weeks, the longer we look, the more we see. And so silent looking is a way for us to do that before we get to language. Which can sometimes get in the way of seeing. The third step is asking clarifying factual questions.
So this is the members of the cohort asking the artist who's presenting Just to clarify, what am I seeing? Like, I think I know what I'm seeing, but I would like to know a bit more about it. Again, these are not meaning questions. We save the first third for really just focusing on what are we seeing? Are we understanding it correctly? The fourth is feedback. We get into four phases of feedback here. Number four, the first of our four feedbacks is what's working and why.
So this is what's strong about the piece. The fifth is feedback about What is this about? All right, now we finally get to the meaning part. And we get to interpretation and evaluation. Six. We turn it back around and the artist responds by sharing things about the effect and the intent that they were hoping for with this piece, and then getting to ask their fellow cohort members key questions about the work that they are interested in exploring. Seventh, we do feedback where We talked about what could be stronger.
So this is finally the constructive part of it Up until now, it has just been learning to see, practicing seeing and helping the artist see outside of their own head and their own perspective. To make sure that the effect of the work is happening as intended. And to find out what's been confusing or what might have been unclear along the way. Right at the end, we finally get to what could be stronger, giving constructive feedback. And we finish with the artists themselves again, Talking about what they're taking away from the session.
So it's about synthesis again and not defending positions and then making a couple commitments to things they're going to experiment with So that's the big framework. We're going to go into each of these in more detail now. In the time we have left.
Like I said, the first step, set up the artwork. This is like a minute. Two minutes tops. All we're saying is what this is, right? What's the title? Is it part of a series?
Like, what's the context here? Like, there's 100 pieces here. Okay, that's context that's useful. Maybe don't bring 100 pieces to your crit. We're not going to get to look at them deeply and closely in two minutes or over the 45 minutes even. What stage it's in, right? Is this an early draft or a later draft? And where to look, right? How do we access or navigate what this is?
So the rule here is that these are only the logistics the group needs to look. Number of images, order, is the order fixed or flexible? Make sure you turn your sound on or off. Whatever those might be, every work is different. Right now, we're not sharing intent or meaning or goals. You won't get a neutral read as an artist if you skew things right off the bat by saying, this piece is about this, or I intended to accomplish this with it.
So an example artwork setup. This is called Time Explorations. These are pieces, these pieces are part of a series of digital works. There are eight images here made over the last few weeks. I'm looking to release it online for collectors in about two months. This is about a dozen hours of work, but it still feels like an early draft. And make sure you click the diagonal arrow in the corner so you're seeing it full screen when you look. You can use the arrow keys to flip through. That's all the setup should be. Quick one and done, very factual information about the piece.
Like I said, The setup time is not for explaining intent or meaning. It's not for a long backstory about the piece and how it came to be or where it came from. This is really important. It's not a time for self-deprecating framing. Saying that this is bad or sorry, this isn't ready. I felt really rushed in doing this or I really don't like this piece. I kind of hate it. All of those self-deprecating framings nudge the group toward reassuring you as an artist instead of analyzing the piece. Right, we now see your insecurity and we want to help. And so we will do that by not giving the analysis that you actually came for.
So we set down any kind of negative framing that we are used to doing. I'm certainly guilty of it myself when walking into a feedback session.
So you made something, let the work speak. We care about you. Let us come in neutral so we can see it more clearly and be most helpful to you. Because that's the goal here. After the setup, we do our silent look for two minutes. Everyone looks without speaking and makes notes for later rounds. This is really a beautiful chance to slow down and take a minute Right. We are used to scrolling so fast on our phones all day, every day. When I scroll Instagram, I flip through 100 images, you know, in a few minutes and I don't really see any of them.
So this is really a moment to step out of the flow of your day and be present with something, which is really exciting and I find really nourishing as an artist. So the only rule here is no talking until the silent look is done.
So we don't think no reactions out loud, no feedback or clarifying questions yet. And no advice dropped into the chat or side messaging with someone. Right. This is just to be present with the work. The other thing that we do during the silent look is maybe take some notes. It can be useful to jot down those first impressions. What did I notice first? What motifs do I see repeating throughout the work? What kind of visual shifts are there in it? This could be a jump in scale or rhythm of the piece where colors contrast in really interesting ways. What feels most alive to you? What grabs hold of your attention in that moment? And what are you unsure about? What questions does it leave you with when you look at this? These can be half sentences, honestly. Don't sit there and write a journal about it. I would encourage you not to. What you're looking for is putting down just a couple of quick words that are memory triggers for things to bring up throughout the feedback session. A simpler way to put this, And I love this framing. It's just, I notice this about the work, I'm drawn to this about the work. And I wonder this about the work. All right, this gets us into seeing. Thinking about the effect of it on us. And getting us to questions. I notice, I'm drawn to, I wonder. Now that we've had the work set up and we've heard we have time to close look at the work silently, we get into just clarifying factual questions. We budget five minutes for this. We don't have to use all of it. And that's true of any of the sections that we're about to go through. Clarifying factual questions are questions that are what and how questions. They're for shared understanding. They help the group see the work accurately before anyone interprets it.
So no praise, no critique, no advice. We're just making sure we all know what we're looking at.
So. Again, clarifying questions are factual. What, where, when, and how. They're physical. They're questions about the materials and the size, the process, the sequence. They are non-leading questions. They do not imply what should change. And they're answerable quickly, ideally just a sentence long. I think here, what do I need to know to read this fairly? Because we're setting ourselves up to read the image and we want to be generous to it always and to the artist's intent. And so, if I don't like it, maybe I'm just missing some information or it turns out this work is supposed to be seen this way and I had it turned this way or I just simply interacted with it incorrectly.
So examples of clarifying factual questions would be things like, what's the intended format? Is it supposed to be print? Is it supposed to be on the web? What size is this in the real world? How many of us times have we looked at images on the internet and then realized later like, that's super tiny or that's ginormous, like that changes our relationship to the work? Is this the final order? Asking about whether things are still fixed or flexible is really important because if something feels like, "No, this is pretty set in stone," that changes the way we think about how we give advice. What materials or tools did you use? What parts are handmade and which are not. If you're applying for something, it can be really interesting to think about what limits are you working within?
Like, do you have hard deadlines? Are there submission requirements? Is there accompanying text or should it stand alone? Where will this be encountered and who is the intended audience? Again, this is just a fact-finding mission at this point to clarify what it is we're looking at so we're all on the same page. Because in a lot of ways, the artist has a lot of ideas in their head that they're just not communicating through the work. That's not inherent to what the piece is. And that's no fault of the work or the artist. We just need a little more information to make sense of it. Clarifying questions, however, are not interpretation questions. Interpretation questions would be like, What does the red represent? Or is this about grief? Or what did you have in mind when? We're not trying to understand the mind of the artist. Clarifying factual questions are just to get to what we're looking at. Interpretation comes later. We've got plenty of time for that. Don't worry. But again, we don't want to skew how we're seeing it just yet. The other thing that's not allowed is opinions disguised as questions. Things would be like, don't you think it would be stronger if you did this? Have you considered making it less? Isn't the problem that Or why didn't you just are all good examples of opinions that We're pretending they're a question, but they're not a question. That's a leading question of a kind. So. No interpretation questions, no opinions disguised as questions. The artist, the presenting artist in that moment should do a few things and here are some guidelines for how to answer. The answer should be one to two sentences. We're going very quick through this despite how I am right now over explaining everything. If you feel pulled into talking about the meaning, And I just say hold that for later. The goal right now is not to talk about the meaning of the work. If the question is outside today's scope, like you have a focus of what you would like to get from this feedback session, you can simply say that's not my focus today, so it's not decided yet. And let it go. It's okay not to answer every question. And if you don't know, I'm not sure yet is a 100% valid answer. You can say that anytime to anything and just leave that for later. It can sit there in the air for you when you want to pick it back up.
So clarifying factual questions only, no opinions, no praise, no critique, no advice. We're all just information gathering to make sure we all know what we're looking at. This is just the facts, ma'am. We're detectives, we're anthropologists in this way. All right, now we get on to feedback. This is where we're at.
So we budget eight minutes for this. The first feedback question is what's working and why? This is our first opportunity. For feedback about what is landing, It's not about what should change, right? This is you're sharing with the artist what you found that resonated with you, that was exciting, memorable, about what is, again, a work in progress.
That's why they brought it here. This is not a finished piece. The oil is still wet on the canvas, if you will.
So we start with positive and non-judgmental feedback. And this feedback that is specific, remember vague. Is always beat out by specific feedback. And we do this to build trust and to empower the artist before we move into a deeper critique.
So each person gives one specific what's working statement grounded in evidence. Again, for our quieter members, this is a good time to chime in with something. Again, when people are raising their hands, offering, here's what I thought was working, speaking in I statements. Saying what was meaningful and striking to them. I like this about the work.
And then they're not raising their hand again until they've seen that everybody is gone. So this is a great time to jump in and share that. Your perspective is unique and we value it. And that's why we put you in these cohorts together. , It made me feel steadier because it anchors each image, even when the landscape changes. I like the pacing from image two to image three. It made the shift feel dramatic because the negative space opens up. I love how the sound sits under the voice. It made the piece feel intimate. Because that mixing choice puts the voice in the foreground. Notice what's nestled in here, right? All of these are I statements. And they are all anchored in evidence, right? That's what the because is doing in the middle of the sentence. Each time you're saying, I like this. It had this effect. And it did it because of this evidence. The Good, What's Working comment has those three parts: observation, what you saw and heard, The effect, what did it do to you as a viewer? And the evidence, what in the work caused that effect. I like this simple formula of I notice blank, it made me blank because blank.
So some suggestions for what to comment on. I'm not going to read every single one of these, but we can talk about the viewer experience, what grabbed your attention first or where your eye was drawn to. We can talk about craft and formal choices. This could be the composition. This could be something about the materials, how the tension plays across it. We can talk about the meaning and reading, what themes or questions you read, what emotions or atmosphere the work carries, what feels ambiguous. In a productive way. Again, we're not ascribing the intent of the artist at this stage still. Just what are we seeing in the work? What did we think was strong? Cohesion and voice, what makes it feel like this artist? What's not allowed in this stage And I'm sorry to keep coming back to pages like this that are here's what's not allowed, but it feels really important given how many bad crits I think many of us have been in to make sure that we're stepping away from some of the things that would otherwise set us up to fail.
So that includes things like vague praise, It's beautiful, it's cool, nice work. If it's true, make it useful by naming why. Right, anchoring it in evidence helps us make that what we're saying useful. Because then that helps the artist see where it is in the work itself. We avoid evaluation language.
Right? This fails, this is weak. Right here at this stage, we're talking descriptive and responsive, not judgmental. And the last is advice or suggestions. I like it, but you should. Again, we're saving all of our advice for the very tail end of this session.
So the artist's role here in this moment is you're hearing what is strong about your work and why. It's to let yourself receive. This round of feedback is about how the work is already reaching people and resonating with them.
So take notes on that. Especially if you hear something you hadn't recognized about the work. This is a moment, again, just to receive. The next step, so we've talked about what is strong and why. This is-- again, rooted in what we're seeing in the artwork. The next stage, we take a few minutes to do this, is to talk about what is this about?
Right? Our work generally means something. It's trying to say something. And so we move from what we can see in here to trying to make meaning from it. What was the meaning you received?
So before the artist guides us with their key questions, we pause and name what we think is working. What the work is doing, saying, or asking. This matters so much because artists, right, we know we work intuitively. The work can have many different meanings. It can communicate something before we even know how to articulate it ourselves as artists.
So this round helps the artist hear that early meaning, and how we as viewers are doing meaning making without having to explain or defend it. This is really important because the next stage after this, the artist will talk about their intent. They'll talk about what meaning they intended. But it's so useful for us, I think, to hear What did people think it meant before we tell them what it meant? Again, this is about coming in neutral before we skew an interpretation.
So the operative questions ask, what do you think this is about? Like that's the big one. Just what do you think this is about? We talk about it for five minutes. You can make a claim about what you think it's about. And you can back it up with the evidence that led you there in the work. I read this as blank because blank. And again, we just keep coming to the because word because evidence is so important. What do you see in the work that's leading you to this conclusion? This could include themes and ideas, things about the relationship or tension between parts of the frame, a mood and atmosphere. Question the work is posing for the viewer to answer. There are a lot of ways to interpret what about means. Then we move on to The next stage of feedback, the artist comes back into control. This round is where the crit is artist-led. And they're going to explore the effect, the intent, and the key questions.
So as the RSC share the goals behind the work, and choose what kind of help you want. Again, we are empowering artists in our cohort feedback sessions to ask for the kind of help that you want. And so we're making this space kind of here at the two thirds mark for you to articulate that and receive that.
So the group will respond directly to what you've requested. So our aim is not to cover every concern. And I know as artists, we come with a lot of concerns. But our aim is to get clarity on the two to three key questions that will move the work forward.
So what does this look like? In this round, the presenting artist does a few things. They state your effect sentence. The effect sentence is describing one sentence, what you want the viewer to experience, understand, or feel when they encounter the work. What is your intended effect? And keep that simple. Right. I want people to have an experience of beauty. I want people to be horrified at what is happening in this part of the world in this political situation. I want people to feel a call to action to get involved in this issue that I'm passionate about. I want people to have a moment of quiet. In this busy world. We're so used to talking, I think, as artists about what a work means, what it's supposed to say. And we forget to talk about what does it do? All right, artwork. Is a thing that is completed by the participation of the viewer. And so what do we actually want the effect to be when someone encounters it? And that's often encountering before, again, the meaning has been explained. It's the reason we have, again, your fellow cohort members talk about what they think the piece is about before we get here. But you start out by naming your the effect sentence that's important to you. Then describe the context of the work in a minute or two. Describe the context behind the piece. And that in a minute or two is so important. I think all of us are prone to over explaining our work at times. And the truth is, the more we talk in our cohort feedback session as the artist in the hot seat, the less we get to hear. Yet we're actually taking time away from receiving feedback.
So you want to boil this down to what is the most essential parts of the context that you want to share and do that in a minute or two. And then the big part of this section this artist-led section is then to ask two to three key questions. You should ask each question one at a time. And our aim is to sharpen pivotal choices you made about the work with clear, actionable feedback.
So I would encourage you to come with a sense of what kind of questions you want to ask about the piece and get feedback on. These are about, again, pivotal choices you made along the way. And these choices, because this is work in progress, they're usually fresh. They're not settled things. And so getting feedback on them is crucial at this moment.
So you can come with those prepared, but I would recommend letting them shift as necessary as you hear what people have said through the first half of our feedback session. The cohort responds to the questions as asked with no detours, right, the goal is to be as useful as possible to the presenting artist. And they In this moment, it's for them to articulate what they most need and have questions about.
So effect sentence, describe the context, ask two to three key questions. A strong key question is singular. It's one concern per question. It's specific. It's about attention or clarity. Tension in the piece, the pacing. A strong key question is answerable by viewers.
So each question should be something a viewer can answer from what they see in the artwork itself. They shouldn't have to guess, and they shouldn't have to ask you to explain more about the piece before they're able to answer.
So that's one of the reasons I describe these questions as keeping it simple. But again, what can a viewer see in the piece? If they can't see it in the piece to answer the question, or requires extra context you haven't given and would need to explain, it's not right for the key question section.
And then the last part here is it's decision linked. A good key question clarifies which direction to take. It tells you about, you've already heard what is working. You've already heard what your cohort members think the work is about. Right, this is a moment which you can clarify where we're headed to by the end of our feedback session, which is where do I go from here? And you know best. Because you've been working in that piece. But this is a chance to, again, get outside your head and hear other people's perspective on those key decisions you made along the way as you're trying to figure out what to do next from here and what to explore in your work next.
So examples of key questions. I'm thinking about where does your attention go first and then second in a piece. Everyone is a little bit different, but there are definitely things that draw the eye in particular ways. What feels consistent across the series? Is the emotional tone landing? What looks least resolved right now? That's a great question. Thinking about what feels finished and unfinished can feel a little different from what's resolved. You can have a section of a painting where you left it more raw and incomplete, the blending isn't quite as smooth as other parts, but that unresolvedness might actually be a strength, not a weakness. That's not unfinished, you chose where you end. Based on what you see, what do you think the work is about? What feels unclear or underdeveloped?
So two things to avoid here. One is asking everything at once. Making your question too dense, asking too many questions makes feedback shallow.
So pick one key question at a time. And we'll go through as many key questions as we can in the eight minutes that we have for this artist-led section. The other is to not ask leading questions.
So an example that might be, do you see how it's about grief or do you see how it's about surveillance capitalism? Well, now that you've told me it might be about those things, I am more likely to try to figure out if it's in there or not.
So try to ask neutral questions instead. Instead of leading your viewer to a particular response that they know will reassure you as an artist and make you feel good at the end of this. Our second to last section here. As feedback about what could be stronger. And we dedicate a good solid 10-minute chunk to this.
So this is the round where we move from what is already working to what might strengthen the work next. And our aim is not to redesign the project. Our aim is to offer a small number of clear, high-value possibilities that the artist can experiment with.
So in this round, we offer interpretation. An evaluation Right, those were the last few steps in the Feldman method that we looked at for visual analysis. In our first week. We offer constructive advice, And comparative statements can be really powerful here.
So within those four categories, here's some examples of what constructive feedback about what can be stronger might look like. So under interpretation, I read this as, or the way I'm making sense of this is, The relationships I'm seeing between these elements is This The question this work seems to be asking is, Evaluation would be what lands most for me? Or for me, the most compelling choice here is or the part that feels most or least coherent is You can see how we're starting to get into statements that aren't just about what's strong, but the word gains or loses energy when it does this.
So we're naming the things that are resonating, but we feel it can be strengthened. And then under constructive advice, It might be worth trying. And there's that really important might. Or perhaps. I'd be curious what happens if You tried this. The next step could be One adjustment that might help is It could be interesting to see what happens if you All of these, again, are opening up a branching path of possibilities for where the work could go instead of shutting down creativity. You're giving them a menu to choose from, in essence, and letting the artist see what resonates with them most.
And then finally, comparative statements. Compared to the rest of the pieces in the series we looked at today, this one particular piece feels different for this reason, or stronger, or fill in the blank. This piece carries the series more than X, Y, and Z. This one is perhaps the strongest or weakest link right now because And again, there's that because backing up with evidence. Or this one appears to answer a different question than the others because...
So we're starting to think about if we're offering more than one image in a feedback session, how do we think of the whole? And how do we find what is working as a relational value between pieces?
So that's where comparative statements come in. So four types of feedback you can offer.
And then whatever you say here should be one Framed as just your perspective using I and perhaps statements. Two Backed up with evidence because I see in the work And three. Offer potential directions to explore and experiment, perhaps and might offer, again, a branching path of possibilities.
So an example of what could be stronger This would be for an abstract piece that kind of has that Agnes Martin kind of vibe. The palette reads quiet, almost restrained in this abstract piece. Because the values stay so close together.
So it creates a sense of calm for me. But my eye never finds anything to anchor on to keep my attention in the frame. I want to linger, but I'm finding it hard. I'm curious what would happen if you experimented with adding a couple high contrast accents to create some clear points of interest for the viewer.
So we're describing what we're seeing in the piece. The palette reads as quiet. The values are close together. We're describing the effect. It creates a sense of calm for me. Then we're stating the effect that we struggled with. My eye never finds anything to anchor on because all the tones, the values are so close together. So I have a hard time staying within the frame itself. And so we've proposed a possible solution, a possible path for exploration. I'm curious what would happen if you experimented with adding a couple high contrast accents.
So you've identified what you think is the root of the issue and then proposed one possible path for exploration. The final section of our cohort feedback sessions is closing with an artist reflection and commitments. And we take five minutes to do this because it's really important. And I hope you've been experiencing this as you've done as you've gone through the different lectures over the past few weeks. It's important to do synthesis. It's important to take it into ourselves what we are trying to accomplish.
So this is the part where in this feedback session, we talk about what is most useful. And that's how we end. The goal is not to defend the work or answer every comment that's been said in the 40 prior minutes. The goal is to turn what you heard into clear next steps.
So the presenting artist shares uninterrupted And again, this is just five minutes for them. This is not conversation anymore. It is just the artist speaking.
So they share what I'm taking, what I'm not taking. And two concrete explorations to try before next time. And the rule here is the presenting artist does not debate feedback. They synthesize it.
So what I'm taking. Name the strongest things you heard. Keep it specific. Strong prompts might be things like, The pattern I noticed in everyone's feedback was this, or the biggest surprise for me. Was blank. The most helpful clarification I got is, Or what I want to preserve as I revise this. Right. Preserve can be really important as a word. Right. People are giving a lot of advice about what to change or evolve in the piece.
Some of that might be useful, but it's really useful to identify what do I want to preserve in the piece as I continue to revise what's most essential to me. The tension I want to lean into is The choice I'm more confident about after hearing you all share feedback is this. Or the question I want to keep working with is blank.
So what am I taking from this conversation? How am I synthesizing everything you said? You can share what I'm not taking. You don't have to, but It's a good chance to name what you're setting aside for now and why, to name it for yourself. We do this while keeping it neutral. It's not about the people who shared that particular sentiment. It is not rejection. It's focus. The most important thing we can do as creatives is to become laser focused on what is most important to us and try to avoid the distractions. And so what we're choosing not to take is Instead, Not a rejection, but it's a sense of focus.
So strong prompts here might be, I'm setting aside blank for now because it's not my priority this week. It could simply be a timing thing. I'm not taking blank because it would pull the work away from blank. To do this is to not be able to do something else.
So again, you're setting priorities. I'm parking blank. I'm parking this idea until I solve blank first. Or I'm not ready to decide on blank yet. And that's fine. Again, I'm not ready to decide is just as 100% valid as we said at the top saying, I don't know, or I'm not ready to answer that yet. To any of the questions that are asked to you. Throughout all of this, you don't need to justify yourself. One sentence is enough. This is, again, not about being defensive. It's about synthesizing so you can set yourself into action in the weeks that follow.
And then finally, after talking about what you're taking and what you're not taking, We close by committing to two explorations. So good exploration is one, specific. You can tell if you did it. Two, it's limited and realistic. It fits into your available time and resources. And three, It's useful as an exploration even if it fails. The exploration, the experiment will teach you something.
So can you measure that you did it? Can you do it by the time that you say you're going to and making sure it's going to be useful?
So some exploration starter examples. Before next time, I'm going to experiment with blanks. In the example we had earlier, it could be I'm planning to experiment with that idea of putting in high contrast points into my tonally similar abstract painting. I like that comment. Thank you so much for that. I'll make two contrasting versions to explore where blank. I'm going to make two new abstract paintings rather than revising the one that I've shared today, but in one I'm going to go a little harder on the contrast and putting in some points of color to try and draw the eye and keep viewers in the frame. And the other I will not use some of those colors, but I'll try to do a similar sense of balance and exploration. That could be in paint, that could be in a sketch, right? These don't have to be finished work explorations. These can be small experiments too. I'm going to remove, add, or shift blank and see what changes. And I'm planning to try a variation that pushes blank. At the very end of coming up with your two explorations that you want to commit to, for the next few weeks. We want to always support you through accountability as a cohort. Being in a cohort is about not being alone in this process. To help us with that accountability. We finish by saying, I'll post a progress update in the cohort work in progress channel by blank. And that'll be a new channel that gets added in once our cohorts start actually doing feedback sessions together. The Posting a progress update and committing to how often you're planning to do that is again about pushing yourself to have follow through as an artist, to not simply work when creativity strikes. It's recognizing that We get verbal feedback in our cohort feedback sessions, but we get feedback written feedback. In the cohort chat channel in our work in progress channel.
So there are plenty of opportunities to continue to get feedback outside of this moment. But naming a timeline that you plan to work on and what the goals are and what explorations are going to do next helps start building in that accountability now. What the reflection time at the end, the last five minutes, is not for is to re-explain the intent or the backstory. It's not to respond to each person's comment. It's not for asking the group new questions, which we can save that for the cohort text chat. At the end, it's simply about coming back to what are you taking away? What are you not taking? And what explorations are you going to do next? We're not, at this point, don't need to defend. We don't need to put on armor and protect ourselves. We don't need to set the record straight on anything. This is literally just about action.
So some examples for exploration ideas. What I'm taking. Several of you responded most strongly to the restraint in the palette and the tension between geometry and soft remarks. It tells me the quiet intensity is the strength to protect in this body of work.
So something to preserve. What I'm not taking. I'm setting aside the idea of adding text for now I want this to stand on visual structure first. Again, no more explanation needed.
That's why visually you can even see it is the shortest of the three examples here because you don't have to defend it. It's simply for now. And that's not a judgment on whoever shared or gave the advice to add text to this abstract piece as some kind of layering. And the last one, experiments, explorations. I'm going to make two studies. One with a single high contrast accent and one with none and compare what happens to a tension. I'm going to push the hard soft contrast further in one area and see whether it sharpens the central tension.
So again, naming these things for yourself will push you to follow through on it and knowing that your fellow cohort members are expecting you to share those explorations in the feedback a work in progress channel for Bye. After this feedback session, after you've done the exploration.
So those are our eight. Again, That probably took longer to explain than it will to actually do. I'll call out some steps along the way over our first few weeks as we're doing this to remind people what we're doing next and what the goals are. We'll start our cohort sessions pretty quickly in our first few weeks because it will require some extra time for explanation along the way to remind people what are we doing at this step, what is this step for. But we set up the artwork, we look at it silently for a couple minutes, We get some clarifying factual questions to make sure we're all clear on what we're looking at, that we're looking at the same thing and we're understanding what we're looking at. Correctly. Now, then we talk about what's working and why, what's strong in this piece. Then we talk about what is this about? We try to discern some meaning before the artist has shared any of the meaning or intent behind it. Toward the second half, the artist then shares their effect sentence, right? What was the effect that I wanted to have with this piece? Make sure their intent and the context that it's operating in And then they ask two to three key questions that they would like answers back from their fellow cohort members. Finally, the last bit of feedback is what could be stronger. It's the largest block of time in here because it's the one that now that we've built up a body of evidence and knowledge about the piece from looking at it for the previous 30 minutes. Only after that 30 minutes of looking are we really in a position to speak about it in a way that can be constructive to the artist. We've thought deeply about it. And we've thought deeply about it because we care about our fellow cohort members. We want them to succeed. We are for you and your growth. And we finish with the artist reflecting on what they're going to take away, not take away, and then making commitments to some explorations they're going to do. Following this.
So, synthesis at the end to make sure that everything else we did in the prior 40 minutes up to that point is not for nothing, right? It's not just to pat you on the back and it's not to tear you down. It's to set you into motion. It's to push you along into the next thing that you're going to do And then to be there to hold you accountable and check in the coming weeks as you share work in progress and to continue to talk in the community chat about what is working and what is not in the same way that we do in here.
So... That is everything. That's the breakdown for today. I left plenty of time here at the end for questions because I know this is a lot. And so I'm going to leave this slide up on screen for right now. But This structure will become more familiar the longer we do it. It's simply breaking into three, like there are three big chunks to this, right? There's a looking phase and making sure we're looking at the right thing the right way. There's a meaning phase. In the middle. And at the end, we're talking about what is stronger What could be stronger? And what we're going to take away from that conversation.
So. There are bigger chunks here operating, but The mentor's job is to kind of keep the clock and keep it rolling while not stifling good conversation when it starts happening. Remembering some of our key ideas at the very beginning that we try to only answer in 30 to 45 second chunks. We're not monologuing. That we raise hands and make space for quieter members to share. And that we are not making judgments about the person, we're assessing the work itself.
So, That's it. I'm going to open up the floor to questions then. I'm curious... More responses.
That can't have been perfectly thorough, I would assume. Yeah, Pierre.
Well, I.
Speaker 2 | 59:36
Absolutely agree. I love this.
I mean, I wish I learned this technique and these ideas of talking about an artwork 30 years ago. So it's I mean, I'm overwhelmed by the intellectual interest of all this methodology.
So I'm really extremely grateful for you to share this with us. And I mean, I have a philosophical question for you, Haver. As an artist, are we legitimate to be art, Pritik.
Speaker 1 | 01:00:16
Well, as some of you might know, I'm married to a critic, so I think a lot about criticism. She's a film critic. She's writes creative nonfiction like essays and books. And so we think a lot about criticism and what that means.
I mean... Criticism is just thinking about a work. It is trying to read what it means and why it means it. Why it exists in this cultural moment And I think artists are uniquely equipped to answer those questions in different ways than critics who come from a Yeah. Where that's their job and they may come from a different background.
Like Ben Davis, the art critic at Artnet, who does that really great podcast with them. He comes from a philosophy background. And so philosophy influences the way that he writes and thinks about work. But why does he get to write and think about work? Because he practiced doing it a lot. And that just comes from seeing and putting in the legwork of going to galleries and I think artists are Equally equipped, we come from different backgrounds, all of us. I think that's come out in our cohort sessions this week. And I'm excited to hear so many different perspectives, but we are equally equipped to do so. Because we Again, criticism is just a form of thinking. It's just a way of trying to think through what a piece is. And every human does that when they walk into a gallery.
Like whether they're an artist or a critic or none of the above. My dad, when he walks into a gallery... Is performing a form of criticism. We just don't call it that because criticism sounds really formal. And we think of it as a thing that has to be written or performed in a podcast. Audio or video and Yeah, artists. I think practicing articulating it as again the thing that gets us to be both better thinkers and better artists and who knows maybe we'll finish a year of this and you'll be like yeah i'm really good at looking at art and deciphering what it's about like maybe i should write about art and that doesn't again doesn't have to be criticism but I think you'll find that practicing this method will equip you to talk about art in a deeper way.
Speaker 2 | 01:02:44
Okay. Thank you, Ivor.
Speaker 3 | 01:02:51
I will say, just adding to Pierre's comments, It seems like. We are definitely equipped for criticism to do that well, and in fact, maybe better than perhaps your average viewer or collector.
And then sometimes, I think actually that's great for adding depth to our work and that's important. Though it doesn't always mean that an average viewer or collector is going to like the work after the changes we make from such criticism.
You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1 | 01:03:21
But.
Speaker 3 | 01:03:22
If it's all about curb appeal to people walking past the gallery, you know, knowing that this is channeling Kandinsky or the supremacists or something like that wouldn't necessarily affect them at all. It's still valuable though.
Speaker 1 | 01:03:41
Yeah, it's interesting to think about when is art in dialogue with other art and therefore requires pre-existing knowledge " I mean, I would say that's one of the things that's hurt art and art history is that the deeper it is, the harder it is to give people entry points. So I very much am of the mindset like, You should be able to decipher quite a bit of it just from looking if you're willing to give it a few more minutes than the average viewer.
Yeah. Dallas, I saw your hand.
Speaker 4 | 01:04:15
Yeah. Thank you, Heir, for these guidelines. This has definitely been very useful and I love how they translate. Towards.. Even a critique of 101... But I love to ask How would you see this transform specifically to set up the artwork part? How would you transform it If. The artist wants feedback not on a specific piece but in like probably I mean a lot of us have worked with a collection around 100 pieces 200 pieces and we probably don't want feedback on one specific piece but and the probably the connection between them or the ideas between them or for example as well " of the framework for time-based work where you see one piece at a given time, but then you see another piece at another given time.
So my question would be, how would you frame it if the work It's not naturally a one-on-one or you want to critique, not be on a specific piece, but on the connection between them or on a time base between them. I don't know if that makes sense.
Speaker 1 | 01:05:41
- It does, 100%. Yeah, it's one of the reasons at the beginning when describing setting up the artwork, we talked about like some of that setup might just be explained like, "This is part of a series. Here's how many pieces we're looking at." So that's very much in the mindset.
I mean, I don't want to set a number. I think setting hard numbers is always risky. But I think 100 would be too many. Of course. Maybe more than 20 would be too many. But who am I to say, we'll experience this together.
Yeah, I probably... Yeah, 20 to 25, like, top upper limit and like that's good. But I would say that's the other reason we have people sharing the link or posting the images or however you're giving people access to view 24 to 48 hours before the cohort feedback session.
So you can say, I know that when this artist presents, they're usually presenting time-based work. I need to snag a few minutes to watch. It can be useful to post the runtime of the video.
So you're like, okay, I know I need to block out seven minutes to watch this. I can do that tomorrow. I can't do that right now.
And then it's up to them to remember to do that. The silent looking part really if we'd spend more than two minutes on it, we have to start stealing time from other categories here. But the truth is, people will continue looking throughout the entire thing.
So in a body of work that is 20 images or 15 images, you would... Yep. Spend a couple minutes flipping through, then doubling back through what is most interesting to you within those and starting to linger on images.
So I would advise everyone during their cohort feedback session to continue looking throughout, right? We're looking at the pieces to find what we're saying and to be able to back it up with evidence.
Speaker 4 | 01:07:42
Thank you. Thank you.
Speaker 5 | 01:07:51
Hey Haver, do you have any recommendations on like the best place to post your work online, whether it be like Google Photos or Vimeo, like any suggestions for everybody. Just because during that silent look, if someone's like, I can't open this link or there's an issue, then it's like, it breaks the silence so any recommendations there would be.
Speaker 1 | 01:08:14
Good Yeah, sharing it early. That's actually one of the other reasons I forgot to mention. Sharing it early is a way to make sure it works for the largest number of people. You'll have a work in progress channel where you're able to drop images, stills.
So that can be one good place to share because everyone knows where to find that. The Next, though it's really good to... I like Google Drive. Sharing a Google Drive folder that somebody can download and see the higher res version. That ends up in Mighty Networks can be really useful. It's just really important to make sure you turn on anyone with the link can see this. Because otherwise, yes, the first person who opens it immediately DM you and say, hey, it's still locked, which was me reviewing art historian applications and sample lectures. Just email it Me or Laura emailing everybody constantly.
So Google Drive can be good for that. Vimeo. I like Vimeo. YouTube, though.
I mean, YouTube is... More has more space and is more free to use than Vimeo. Vimeo just got bought out by a big VC that gutted their staff like two weeks ago.
So Those. They're not as good as they used to be, as much as I have liked them over the years. I think they cap out at-- like one or two gigabytes worth of video upload.
So one long video and it's done. Like that's it. I think I have like one 20 minute video and I used up all my free storage.
So you shouldn't have to pay for a space, is one thing I would say. Does anyone have any other sharing suggestions they want to throw out, platforms or other things, I'm certainly open to ideas. James's question is a good one.
Speaker 6 | 01:10:11
This simple websites that you can use like Wix, Throw your stuff right up there on a page. And, you know, for the most part, it's really hard to Google that stuff unless and if you have the SEO set up.
So if you don't want anybody else seeing it, you could just have a really simple page with your work, be it video or be it, you know, just straight images. And that's a simple way to do it.-
Speaker 1 | 01:10:35
So Wix, the website builder, is having a website page of your own. And SEO just refers to search engine optimization. Google doesn't crawl every web page if you don't set it to be crawled.
Like our cohort.artistcommons.art is set that way, right? It's not part of search engine finding, right? You find artistcommons.art, the root site, but you don't find that. Other responses, reactions to feedback and crits in general? Or things from past experiences that feel relevant here?
Speaker 6 | 01:11:19
Just one thing I wanted to touch on and get your opinion on. I know for me specifically, usually when I'm going into a critique, I kind of have an idea of what I'm looking to get feedback on. But it sometimes stops me from being a little open minded and hearing what everybody has to say.
So how do you feel we should go about addressing that when we are looking for something specific in the feedback, but keeping it open? How do you suggest we go about doing that?
Speaker 1 | 01:11:55
Yeah, we really save a lot of that for the sixth step six here where the artist leads talking about both their intent and the key questions they want to explore. Because I would say that the two things that get said before that, right, what's working And what is this about? Which is to say what is strong and what does the work mean, do we think, are just useful things for any artist to hear. When people are coming into it cold because that's how most viewers are going to experience your work, right? They're going to stumble across it in a gallery or on the internet or in a book of some kind and they're going to look at the image for a few seconds before they go looking for more information. And whether or not they go looking for more information depends on their experience of the work in that moment of looking.
So it's just useful to Keep practicing always making space for people to share those honest reactions when they come to it cold. With no knowledge.
And then yeah, step six is really carved out to say, here's what I'm looking for feedback on. Your key questions can really frame what might happen in-- Section 7 on what could be stronger, but that will be up to your cohort members on how much they want to follow the gentle guiding that your key questions would bring. But we kind of save that again for the halfway point because Most people aren't going to have any context. And so asking for, I really need feedback on this or that too early would be Again, skew that honest, neutral feedback, which is just so hard to get. It's one of the reasons it's really important to us to carve out time for that here. Great question, Nick.
Yeah, we only have a few minutes left. Any other closing thoughts here?
Today I brought my-- Create something today even if it sucks mug. I really strongly believe in having things around your space that remind you the key words you need to hear on a given day. This is one of my favorites. I have a dream that in six months from now, there'll be artist commons mugs with some good phrases on them.
So that's one of my dreams. But this is one of my favorites. It's one of the less crass ones in there.
Well, good. I'm glad to see everyone's smiling faces. Thinking about this stuff together is really exciting. It's Again, the flow is built to make space for people to your honest perspectives without putting your finger too much on the scale as an artist, which we're prone to do. I would say most crits I've been in over the years, they either start out with The artist saying nothing at all.
So I don't know what I'm looking at and why I'm looking at it. Or they start out with the artist explaining way too much and immediately steering me in a particular direction and way of seeing. And that's often because when I see work, it's either in a classroom setting or it's in a studio visit in which the work that they put up, I am there to see them and I am there to see the work. But it's just me and the artist. And that means there's a lot of awkward silence unless they start talking. And I really value the silent looking part of it. But it's hard to come by in a studio visit.
So, you know, many weeks from now, we will talk about how to do a good studio visit. And I'm excited to talk about that as well and how to frame that. On Thursday, the McCoys are coming back. They are going to do their craft workshop. Which means sharing their most recent piece, which they didn't really touch on in their presentation. This will involve some digital work and modeling. This will involve some sculpture. This will involve thinking about installation art. It's all very process-based.
So I think there'll be a little something there for everybody, no matter what your process is and how you've been working. That'll be exciting to me.
And then we'll go from there. Thank you again for a great day. Thanks for your attention. I know it's a lot to absorb very quickly. And I just want to acknowledge that upfront. But again, the structure of this is going to be The structure of this will be second nature by the time that we're a few weeks into it.
So you will have these slides to reference to if you need them. And So you'll be able to Again, look at example sentences. I tried to put in a lot of example sentences that if you felt like I don't understand what this is like I know Haver explained it. I can go back and watch the video. But again, what is this? The example sentences are there to really be a light post guiding you in some way and Otherwise, we'll practice it together. We'll figure it out together. This is a first. Stab at what this is going to look like for artist commons, what it means to do this over Zoom. To try and keep it structured without You know, in a classroom, you can kind of gently cut people off in certain ways. You can do things with body language and movement. Here, it's very difficult to do that without being especially rude and talking over somebody. There are fewer ways to signal.
So we've set up the structure to be as equitable as possible, to make space for as many voices and perspectives to be heard, and again, to help artists see their work more clearly and see what the path ahead could be. Might be, perhaps could be.
So I'm excited to do that with you guys. Thank you again for being here. I'll see one cohort tonight, our late night crowd, 9:00 PM Eastern time, whatever time that is for you. And I'll see another group tomorrow morning at 10:00 AM Eastern time. We've had an issue in the last 48 hours where some cohort members realized that they didn't have the current cohort and their cohort session syncing to their calendar correctly. I just want to remind everybody here to always be checking the All Events tab and not the Live Sessions tab. The All Events tab will include both the live sessions and your cohort sessions, which are two different calendars, and that will consolidate it all in one place.
So if you're looking at your personal calendar and not seeing it, you're not seeing your cohort, That's because you probably synced to the Live Sessions tab. Just delete that calendar, re-add it, re-subscribe from the All Events tab. And our cohorts meet every week. For all of our quarters going forward.
So we have a lot of time together, this week being one of them. And I would hate for anybody to miss because they had misunderstood what the schedule was.
So... I just want to close by saying don't feel pressure to make really fancy presentations unless you want to. People have had slideshows that they've given in the past, and those slideshows are awesome. I think Once you get to a certain level as an artist, it's good to have that slideshow ready for when someone asks you to give a talk. But you should not feel pressure to pop something out very quickly this week or next week just because you've been asked to talk about your work a little bit. There have been plenty of people who pulled up a web browser, opened some tabs, and simply flipped through past projects. That was especially fun for some of the generative art where you could see the generator running live instead of just seeing the stills and the outputs. But again, don't unduly burden yourself here at the beginning.
Like there's no reason, like be making your art. Like that's what the studio time is for. All right. Thank you all for your attention and your time. And I'm excited to go on this journey this year with you.
So we'll figure this out together. It's going to be exciting. Have a good afternoon all.