Haiver | 00:00
Hi everyone, welcome back. It's great to have you here for the second half of our first quarter. We're here with artist Mitchell F. Chan. Mitchell is a conceptual artist who has worked across installation and sculpture, blockchain, video game and interactive art. In our close-looking session on Sunday, those of you who were there got to play a couple of Mitchell's video games which included Xantar and Lady Boss.
Honestly, I am so excited for this conversation and presentation by Mitchell. Playing Xantar last year was one of my favorite art experiences. I was on a couch in a gallery next to what was at the time the editor of Artforum, Tina Rivers Ryan, with a video game controller in my hands trying to make my little green blob eat all the villagers and maybe some chieftains, which turned out to be impossible, and having a very good time thinking about what art is and what art can be.
So Mitchell is a Canadian artist based in Toronto. I often see him around the New York gallery scene Honestly, I've never been up to Toronto to see you, but I see you in New York all the time.
So let's welcome Mitchell F. Chan.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:21
Hey, everybody. Nice to be here.
Sorry, I was just... Thank you very much for that generous introduction. I was just, as you were doing that, I was trying to fiddle around with my Zoom screen and get a gallery view, but that's okay.
Yeah, maybe I'll just disconnect that so as not to be distracting. Okay, welcome. I'm really excited to be here. I understand that you all had the privilege of doing your last session with Kevin and Jennifer McCoy.
So... It's a little bit daunting to be following in those footsteps. But... Let's see how we can do.
So following up and building on behavior's introduction. Let me tell you a little bit more about myself and then how we're going to structure the rest of our afternoon together.
So take it all the way to the back and I promise we'll accelerate to the present moment fairly quickly. I was born in Pembroke, Ontario, which is about five hours north of where I sit right now in Toronto. It's a small town. It is a town that does not have an art gallery in it. It definitely does not have an art museum. If you wanted to go to an art museum, you would have to drive about two hours to Ottawa, Canada. Growing up in Canada, even sort of once you've decided that you want to be an artist, there's not much of a connection to an international art community in Canada. This country, frankly, just doesn't produce a lot of stars, and it doesn't even produce a lot of, I would say, sustainable artist careers, the kind that we think of whenever we think about what a successful artist is.
So I want to... Begin this talk by addressing some of the practical considerations of being an artist. And we're going to start with the really practical, really uninspiring stuff. All right?
Like the grit of it, the like, how do you grind this out stuff. And I promise that as the talk goes along, We'll get more into the highfalutin, conceptual, what does it all mean and how do we think like an artist. We're going to get to how you think like an artist and how you expand your mind like an artist. But we're going to start with just like, How do you grind it out to stay in the game? All right.
So that's where we're going to go. And so I'm going to start by talking about my early career. And this is, I think, like a lot of artists who you will meet in the digital art space currently. And this is true even if you are reaching out beyond the quote-unquote NFT space.
You know, I think Kevin McCoy, and there's no, like, there are few... Digital artists, Kevin and Jennifer McCoy, there are a few digital artists that whose bona fides are as established. Or go back as far as theirs. And I suspect that they would probably split their career into the pre-NFT chapter and the post-NFT chapter.
So that's true of a lot of digital artists, regardless of whether they came out of the NFT boom or not. There was a before NFT times and there was an after NFT times. And we tend to not look at a lot of the pre-NFT work. But it's really important to assess that stuff to understand why someone like Kevin or Jennifer. Or Dmitri Cherniak or Tyler Hobbs or myself was kind of ready to take advantage of that moment when it happened.
So, Most of my work from 2008 to 2020 was large scale public art installations, which is odd because most people who came to know me through NFTs, right, they knew me as the immaterial conceptual NFT guy, the guy whose art was all about The notion of digital art being completely severed from having any physical aspect, all right, from having any presence in this temporal world and existing only in the lofty and ethereal realm of ideas. And yet at the time, I was making all of my money selling like... Three-ton slabs of concrete, you know, and Corten steel. And we'll talk about a little bit why that was as I bring up some other images. It comes down to how do you be an artist when you have no idea? How to be an artist or what an artist does or where their money comes from. Well... For me, I decided to do my undergraduate degree in architecture. This makes sense. I've met a lot of people who did this. You're an artsy kid, but an artist isn't a real job. You would like to do something kind of responsible. You hear that, you know, an architect, they're like an artist. And like there are jobs, like there are job listings for architects. That makes sense.
So you go into architecture. So I go into architecture. Okay, on one hand, huge mistake. Architecture is, architect is not a good job. It's barely a job. And it's barely artistic. But whatever, man. You're going to university. You got to pick something.
So you pick architecture. And what is important is that it gives you some skills and experience in just getting things done and in dealing with real-world issues. Practical constraints and requirements. And so from that skill set, I go through the architecture program. And by the way, I never worked in an architect's office. It was really apparent from that second September of school when some of the kids come back from their co-op programs or summer placements, and they tell you, what is it like working in an architecture office?
And then you find out it's awful. Yeah.
So I never... I never worked in an architecture office. And halfway through, I was pretty sure that I wanted to be an artist. Again, still, despite my fancy architectural education, I have no idea what that means. I was going to architecture school in Ottawa, Canada at Carleton University. Go Ravens, if there's anyone out there. From Canada. And, you know, there are like a couple of commercial galleries and, you know, you'd see the, You ever see one of those art galleries that's like in a shopping mall? Which is essentially like a furniture store that only sells like one very specific piece of furniture, which is the kind that hangs on your walls. But you'd see that and I'd figure, " those guys sell their paintings for money. That's art." That's probably what the job is, man. I get into one of those shopping malls. I'm set, man. I'm there. And you kind of set that as your goal. And it's worth talking about this really explicitly just to demythologize a little bit the origin of artists. I think that there is like... There can be this preconception. It can be really daunting. You ever go and like, to an art opening or you're talking to other artists and you wonder like, Are all these people just like, smarter than me?
Like, did they grow up with, like, parents who were, like, professors at Oberlin College and they were like, dropped Kurt Vonnegut novels in their baby crib and stuff like that? And the answer is like, no. Many of us were once dumbasses. And some of us admit to being dumbasses still. But this is all okay. And the only thing that is important is a curiosity and a fearlessness to fail. Usually that is not a true fearlessness. True fearlessness makes you an asshole. People are truly fearless. They're, I mean, God. They're sociopaths. No, it's better just to be kind of dumb and not realize how hard you're failing as you go along.
Anyway, coming out of school, I had some architectural design expertise, very little tech expertise. Eventually, I learned... I learned a little bit of electronics, a little bit of coding from an artist-run center in Toronto. I'd moved to Toronto because I wanted to be an artist. And I just figured that was kind of how you did it. I learned that at an artist-run center called Interaccess that had some education programming. That was the cheapest education I ever got. It was the most important. It cost me exactly 555 Canadian dollars to sign up for every workshop that they ran in the summer. And so in that summer, I learned just in a very cursory way, like just enough to that the technology stopped being intimidating and I started learning how to teach myself at the fundamentals. But I learned like the introduction to electronics design, coding and processing, max MSP, microcontrollers, robotics and kinetics. I was able to run from that $555 education. I would just kind of keep on making stuff in my evenings and weekends, such that I had a portfolio. And from there, I was able to get a full scholarship to the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
So that $555 of workshops at a nonprofit art center led to about $90,000 in free education, which was really great. My work was still not good, but I demonstrated enough ability with technology to, you know, to get into school, which was pretty cool. Coming out of school.
So there are two ways that artists can make it. They kind of live or die by their community. Now, the word community is a term that has been really distorted and corrupted and diluted to the point of mere meaninglessness by dubious actors in our space. But it really is true. And if you study like other artists, and one of the nicest things, when I started to have some success as an artist, my favorite thing to do was to just, you know, talk to the net artists and the post-internet artists who had come before me. You buy them a bottle of wine and just sign up to listen to their stories. And they have these wonderful stories. And they really were just a group of friends who were dicking around together to entertain each other.
And then eventually, the things that they were doing were considered important or marketable or something like that. So what art school really matters for is just building a community, right?
Like these are your friends and you're gonna support each other. You're gonna cheer each other on. You're gonna show up to each other's openings and you're gonna be like, nakedly and unapologetically inspired by each other and riff on each other's work such that you become something akin to a movement, and you'll either all rise together or not, right? Unfortunately, That didn't happen to me. Because the day after I graduated from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, literally the day after graduation, I moved back to Canada.
So my entire network from my big, fancy, expensive American art school was done. And so I couldn't really get my foot in the door that way.
And then I discovered public art. So now we're going to get to the nuts and bolts, right? We're getting in the nuts and bolts of this.
So eventually I got to public art. And the nice thing about public art is, first of all, it matched up with the skill set that I have right now. I had some ability to design things that were structural. And I had friends who were willing to do this with me and who had some overlapping skill sets.
So I partnered with another guy who had gone to my same architecture school. We made a firm called Studio F-minus, and we started applying to calls for public art proposals. And this is the nice thing about public art is that it's like a normal job. It's like normal work. It's not like this weird gallery work where who knows why this person got picked and why a collector bought this much. Every public art... I shouldn't say this because they're, you know, obviously if Google's building a new headquarters, they can hire whoever they want to do it. But most municipalities, government buildings, publicly funded construction projects, new parks, things like that, you know, they'll have a mandate to have a sculpture in their park or in their plaza or something like that. And they have to have an open call for artists, right? Where it's like, you know, they say, all right, we have... $80,000 to build a sculpture outside this building. It is required due to the same reasons why they have to have an open competition for every drywall supplier. And that's what you are, is a drywall supplier. Your drywall is just... Formed into these vaguely artistic forms, right? But... Okay, finally, I found the one aspect of the art world where you could succeed or fail on mostly merit.
You know, I mean, it's not perfect, but it's a lot more transparent. Than any other art form.
So that's how I kind of get my foot in the door of art. And when I say get my foot in the door of art, I'm not like meeting curators through this public art practice. I'm not meeting fancy collectors. But what I am doing is I manage to make my day-to-day job a creative job, right? And I managed to make... And I was able to take a lot of pride in the fact that making this art was what was paying my bills. And that was really good.
So now we've got the slide up. A lot of this work wasn't technological because it can't be. It's actually really hard to use tech in a public art project. Let me tell you, man, if you're proposing like, we're going to build this freestanding screen or projection project, forget it like you're done man this is so this piece this was one of my later pieces i was really proud of this is a united nations peacekeeping monument and like this was done in you know a mid-sized town in ontario this is done in petersburg peterborough ontario which commissioned this piece because it is the birthplace of lester b pearson whom you You Americans will not know, but he was the Canadian prime minister who formed the first United Nations peacekeeping mission. And so, and, The nice thing about doing this, and I'm not bringing this up to suggest, everybody, if you want to get into art, get into public art. That's not the point of this. The point is that it taught me how to think like this. This is a fairly small project. We had, I think the budget on this project was like 75,000 Canadian dollars, which is like 50,000 US dollars.
Like, you know, like you can't build a two-car garage for 50,000 US dollars. And so it's very difficult to make a sculpture, you know, that really means a lot, especially to... There are a lot of UN peacekeeping veterans who live in this community. And it's like, man, you want to do right by those people, man. Are there any kind of veterans who are just inarguably on the right side of everything? It's those people.
Anyway, so we designed this and we got to design that we have limited budget. So it's like, okay, I think we can do two concrete slabs. We can do some powder coat aluminum and we can afford like, you see, it's like, if you look, you know, half of these things is mirror polished stainless steel and the other half is powder coat aluminum because we can't even afford to go mirror polish stainless steel on the full height of this. But what we have, we're able to create this sculpture. It's using the famous like robin's egg blue of the United Nations Peacekeeper's helmet. And these two forms that kind of stand opposite each other, they create this infinite hall of mirrors effect.
Right? And so the idea is that, And together, they create this illusion of a dotted line that theoretically stretches around the world, right? The notion of a permeable, raised border. And that these two sculptures are sort of characters that keep guard over these kind of divisions in the world which are important but permeable and not barriers. And so this is a piece we were able to do for... For a small amount of money and that had a really big impact. But I want to talk about there are two takeaways from my public art practice. One is that on a practical level, you just, you need to find a job.
Like you gotta find a job and commercial work, is good to get. And a lot of the artists who have really succeeded from...
You know, in the NFT world, had years and years of experience doing commercial work. And what that teaches you, first of all, it teaches you just a skill. Having a skill and being able to iterate things is really important. Being able to work on deadlines is really important. Being able to create when you're in a bad mood and you don't feel like creating or you're not inspired, that is really important. And you need a job. You need to be able to sustain yourself. On a practical level, or sorry, and then on the level of ideas, I said this was... This project was really meaningful. To a handful of veterans who are really involved in the commissioning and artist selectioning process. That meant so much to me. Those were the only people in this process to whom that was meaningful, right? To get this, you've got to go through city councilors. And the only thing they care about is this going over budget?
And then you've got to talk to the maintenance people, right? This exists in a new parquet that they're building. And they just care about, is the bottom of this going to interfere with my snow plowing route? And they care, is that aluminum on the bottom? Is that going to withstand the salting in the winters? My God, we had to do a call. We had to do a study on this. There's a street you can see that runs adjacent to this project on whether the sunlight would reflect off of the sculpture and blind drivers that were passing by, right? And so this is the other most important thing. It's one of the most meaningful public sculptures that I've ever made. And nobody else, like, cares.
Like, I... And so it's just a lesson in getting over yourself. It's a lesson in getting over yourself a little bit. And it took me, so I was doing public art like this for like 10 years.
I mean, like 12 years really. And working through that really was the journey that helped me be ready to be an artist. All right. I was doing a lot of commercial projects. All right. I was doing commercial projects like this. And this is for a big project. Corporation, man. This is, right, and they have this space. It's a beautiful space and they need some kind of installation for their tenants. This is supposed to be about Earth Week or whatever. And look, this is like a fun, this is a really fun project. I'm really proud of it. This thing that I'm showing on the screen right now. I got to use my tech. This is really clever. I designed these circuits so that, All of these inflatable sculptures were connected to little PC fans that I used a resistor capacitor timing circuit on so that the fans turned on and off, which inflated and deflated the sculptures so the birds flapped their wings. Super clever. If I may say so. I was proud of myself for that. But I know that this is not in the realm of fine art. I know that this isn't saying, I mean, I'm telling the client that it says something about sustainability and whatever, because that was like the mandate, but they don't care. And I don't really care. I just got to do the project as an opportunity to exercise my chops. And just learning to be real with yourself about that and still do the work is really important. And you go through these phases when you do commercial work where I mean, you get so... You get demoralized sometimes because nobody cares about the ideas, man. Nobody's really hearing what I have to say about society, man. And it does get frustrating. And you're just cranking stuff up. And some stupid city councilor is like, well, could you make it green? Green is the color on our city crest. And you have to say, yes, sir, I will absolutely do that. But And I've struggled with that for like... 10 years. And it was like kind of just by after 10 years, I was finally comfortable with it. You understand that, okay, it's fine. Not every project that I'm doing has to satisfy every aspect of my creative need. I'm so privileged to be making money doing this stuff. And I'm learning real skills. And on the evenings and weekends, I have my own art practice that I'm doing. And I can feel all the lessons that I'm learning from my commercial work starting to improve the work I'm doing personally. By the end, there'd be a handful of projects where all my interests were able to come together really well.
So this was, I think, the last public art project I did before I kind of quit doing public art because the digital stuff was going crazy. This was a temporary, and by temporary, I mean this is a three-month-long installation. It's called Nil, and it was done after the pandemic. They wanted a sort of like pandemic-like memorial. And this is probably the best example of the stuff that was going on in my personal gallery practice and my commercial work coming together.
So you see that I mean, this is a huge sculpture. I think that's like 40 feet wide. And it's like 16 feet long and like everything was custom built.
So we custom built these soccer nets. And you see, we built these seven foot tall iPhones. And it's like, these kids are on Zoom, but not really on Zoom. It's like a video loop that I created. And they're like, you know, you remember the pandemic? I don't know if you had kids during the pandemic. It was rough, man. It was like rough. You're trying to set up playdates for your kids on Zoom? My God. And so these kids are like kicking, pretending to kick a ball on Zoom.
And then we have this like, Actual ball kicking back and forth. Very clever. One of the few projects where I got to use all my tech skills in a public installation because it was only a three-month project. And I mean, this is the thing that everyone will really care about. No maintenance visits in three months. And that's outdoors too.
So I'm very proud of that. And the ideas are there and et cetera.
So anyway, If you can get a job doing commercial work where you're honing your craft, that is awesome. And when it makes you hate art because now you're doing this thing that you used to love and do it just because you love. Now you're doing it for work and you're doing it for money and other people telling you what to do with this thing that you love. Work through it. And once you work through it, then you're there. Then you're ready. Then you have full control over your tool. This is an example of the gallery and installation work that I was doing at the time. And again, none of this stuff was not making money at all. This stuff was costing me money. It was costing me so much money. But I had a gallery and everything. They were, because I was doing technologically innovative stuff. This is another thing about breaking into a gallery. This stuff is unsellable. It is unsellable.
So if a gallery, when a gallery takes me on, and I know the score and I'm not naive about it, they're taking me on as a loss leader. That's what I am. I'm a loss leader. All right. I'm a door crasher at art Walmart. And what do I mean by loss leader? I would exhibit with a wonderful gallery here in Toronto called Angel Gallery. Jamie Angel is now retired, sadly, but he was a great guy. And he sold mostly beautiful paintings. He sold beautiful paintings that would look very, they would look beautiful and rich people's living rooms and above rich people's sofas and above rich people's fireplaces. And he did quite good business. But what you got to do if you're a gallery Every now and then, like, I do like one show a year that is like really on the cutting edge and unsellable to show that it's like that your gallery is on the cutting edge and therefore all of the really nice, beautiful paintings are on the cutting edge because they come from a cutting edge gallery.
So it's like when I would make something like this piece right here, It's like we didn't even talk about the price. I don't think we even talked about what it would cost to buy it. We both just knew. We knew that I was paying to do this and that was how it was going to go.
So there we are. Now, apologies, I don't think I have the Zoom logged in, so I can't see if we have any chat, but I think I should just keep going, right? Should I just keep going?
Haiver | 28:13
Great. We have a couple of comments here just saying big fan of your work, man, and pointing out that Eric Calderon from Artblocks ran a custom tile company for a long time. And that piece of history, I think, is really helpful.
Mitchell F Chan | 28:25
Exactly. It's massively helpful. It's super important. Okay, so... This piece was really, that I have up on the screen right now, this was really a turning point for me. And I think this was probably the first This was the first really good artwork that I made. And I want to point out, like, I started, I moved to Toronto to be an artist in 2006. This piece was 2016.
So about 10 years of making pretty embarrassing stuff, right? And this is like, it was 10 years before I made, I consider this to be my first good artwork.
So now that I've talked a little bit about the practical things, all right, and I'm sorry, it's not the fun romantic stuff. I've talked about only the unsexy stuff. I've basically said, get a job and get over yourself.
And then suffering builds character. And I hope that I've phrased it, I hope that I've put it with more like actual real world examples in that so they can be useful. But you It's kind of what I said. I don't mean to be a dick about it. But that was just how it went for me. But now with this being my first really good artwork, now let's get into a little bit of how I started to...
So this piece was called, let's go through it again just to make case we didn't see it. This piece is called Something National Conversation. And it is, so I built these kind of two false walls, an ideal world and a bigger gallery. I would just, there would just be these holes in the walls. And see, at these regular intervals, there are Well, I mean, you can see what happens. I don't have to describe, right? These clouds come out and... They smash into each other and then there's just kind of nothing else left. The table and chairs in there are very, I guess I never realized this is a really recurring theme. I always have chairs. And magazines in every exhibition I do. I didn't realize that.
Anyway, the chair in the magazine in here is on purpose. It's on purpose that on the chair and magazine, they have People magazine in them and like...
You know, other kind of like trashy regs and stuff like that. And what you can't hear, if I turn on the audio in this video, will people be able to hear it?
Well, let's just try. We'll try.
Haiver | 31:09
You're not?
Mitchell F Chan | 31:10
No. No. Okay, no problem. You can look this up. I think it's on my website or whatever. But it was accompanied by... A generative audio that I'd made. And what this audio software was doing is it was... Reading the headlines from the New York Times API in real time. And it would kind of chop up the words into a little bit of a collage, just enough that you could still kind of make out what the headline was, but it would stutter a little bit.
And then it was set to... There are these kind of weird, spooky string quartet in the background, and that's all being... Generated kind of pseudo-randomly, algorithmically, you would say.
So it's a little bit this opera that's constantly reading that day's news headlines. And I was doing this in 2016.
So this was happening... I think that's, just after the election, but before the inauguration. And it was like, and so there was like, you know what word came up a lot? It's in the documentation. Remember Kellyanne Conway? Anyone remember Kellyanne Conway? The thing is, it was just constantly going, Kellyanne. Conway, Kellyanne, Demands, right?
Like this and that. And so it was just this endless drone of like reading the newspaper and, you know, that was the soundtrack to this scene in front of us of useless, and I mean this in the most literal way, insubstantial antagonism. That is what this is, a sculpture of. It is antagonism. It is spectacle of conflict, almost literally without substance. These clouds of water vapor are the least amount of substance that I can use to make two things smash each other. And for me, that was just a very That was a perfectly apt description. Of what I saw in the world around me. And, And this is my first good artwork. And now let's talk about the pieces that preceded this that were maybe less good, and I can show you how I got there.
So this piece, "Something Something National Conversation," is an extension of I don't even want to say it's an extension, but it's built on... Concepts that I learned when I was doing my master's degree at the School of the Arts Institute of Chicago.
So let me show you what I was working on in grad school. This is just like a prototype video from my studio. This is obviously before the grad show. This is the kind of stuff that I was doing in grad school. Look at this, man. Look at those lights. Too bad we don't have audio. The sound...
So I'm building this. Look at this machine.
I mean, there are a lot of things about this I'm proud of. A lot of ways that this is quite clever.
So this is me. I mean, and this is like, this is stuff you should do this in grad school. You should be fucking around and, you know, making weird shit like this.
So You see, basically, this is where I developed, you know, I started to develop the Cloud Cannons as an artistic medium. Here, look at the whole thing, man. Man, I milled out all those bearings and all those actuators. That was great. That was great.
I mean, that's what you do when you go to a fancy art school and you have access to all the shops and all the tools and stuff. And that's great.
Like, you want to use them all, right? You want to use them all.
So here's where that ended up. This was my thesis project from the Grad Thesis Show. And what I learned to do was... Okay, so I figured out those cloud cannons and stuff like that. And So I could get better control of them to the point where I could kind of like Watch how these come out. This is going to come out all in the middle like that. That's the letter I. Here comes an N.
You see that kind of like an N? All right, like imagine a dot matrix LED display like a Jenny Holzer display, but it's scrolling upwards and it's kind of messy, but here comes an N. You can see on the end, the next one's going to be I. And so I could spell things out as though this were like the world's stupidest like dot matrix display. And I thought, well, okay, this is the world's stupidest digital text display. What would be the stupidest thing that I could spell out? And that was, okay, what if I programmed it to write out the entirety of the book Don Quixote? Okay. All right. And so, right, so I did. This thing is printing is, it's spelling out the book Don Quixote. And obviously it's set up in such a way that it was, It would take years and years, right? It would take years to do that because it's doing one letter every like four seconds or something like that. Here's a schematic diagram of how I made it all work. By this point, I had really made the actuators more elegant. I found that instead of those choo-choo train actuators, you could actually just use a speaker cone, which just did boom, just enough differentiation in air pressure to push these things out. And it was quieter and just more poetic.
So that was quite lovely. Anyway, this was like my grad thesis project. But you see that it comes... And there's still like a lot of things that I like about this. And it's this kind of thing where I feel like you know, if I put this at like Hefta Gallery, it would do really well because it's like a cool machine that does a trick. And, you know, there is some meaning there.
Like, you know, there's meaning behind it. Don Quixote is a book about a character, Don Quixote, who fundamentally doesn't really know how to interpret art. If you're not familiar with the actual story of Don Quixote, right, that's the story. It's like, there's this guy, and he's basically... A dilettante and kind of a nerd. And he reads books about knights and he doesn't really know, and he thinks that they're to be interpreted literally. And so he decides that he should be a knight and go out on adventures. But of course he lives in the real world and there's no like real adventures to be had. And so he's just kind of a man who doesn't really know how to look at art. He doesn't know how to read a book. And so, I thought, well, the answer, the solution to this guy, the machine that he should use to read a book is to read it through a display device that you can't really read because it's sloppy and it takes too long.
So it's Don Quixote as a... Presentation format for the book Don Quixote. It's fine. And it's like kind of clever, but it's like, it took some time when you're in school. And again, remember, I got access to all the tools and I'm in the shop and so I can build, look, I can do all the things. And you just want to use all the things and be so clever and you want to have people pat you on the head about how clever you are for inventing such a brilliant machine. And you forget, like, look, man, this is my video that I made to talk about my project. And it's like, Here's the thing, like this stuff here, Like, It's just... Nobody cares about this part. Nobody cares about this part. And you want to know what? That's not the world's fault, okay? Because art doesn't exist.
Like the point of an artwork is isn't to prove to the world how clever I am, The point of the artwork is to let somebody feel something or understand something for themselves. This is just the biggest mistake that artists make. The point is not to prove how clever you are. Or how early you are, or how good you are at using Maya, or how good you are at prompting the AI. The point of an artwork is to let somebody feel something or figure something out for themselves.
So the reason why I think that this artwork right here, my grad thesis project, it's almost a good artwork It's almost a good artwork. It's a good grad thesis artwork. It really shows that I should graduate from art school with a good grade. I think it proves that. I think it proves that I deserve a good grade at art school. This is a good artwork. Because it's simplified. All right. And you notice all the clever stuff that I did, all the stuff I'm so clever for figuring it out. How can I, how, you know, how do I generate the water vapor with minimum maintenance for gallery staff, by the way, because I've already figured out at this point, like the gallery staff doesn't want to have to deal with my bullshit. I've learned to get over myself and I'm not even going to be able to get this project installed unless I've thought about how does someone clean up after it? How does someone maintain it? Is it going to work all the time? Are we going to Call me for a maintenance visit all the time. But it's like, it's all hidden away. Nobody ever, nobody entering this project ever has to think about Mitchell fucking Chan. Okay. And that's why it's better.
That's why it's better. Okay, so those are the lessons. That's like, in a brief nutshell, that's how I got from being a bad artist to a better artist. Learning to get over myself, having a job that permitted me to keep on practicing my craft for 10 years of sucking, you know? And yeah, getting some good breaks with art school or whatever.
So that's how I got from bad artist to good artist. Any questions before I move on to... I said that most artists, digital artists, they got to divide their career into the pre-NFT and the post-NFT phase. And look at this, we're at exactly halfway through of our time. And this is the perfect division, right? Between the pre-NFT phase and the post-NFT phase.
So any questions before I move on to the... Post-NFT phase. Because now I'm going to stop talking about the suffer, get over yourself, get a job part. And I'm just going to talk about the fantastic being a genius part.
Haiver | 42:18
Which we love for you, very talked about two different school experiences, the architecture one that you knew very early on wasn't quite the right fit and then SAIC.
Mitchell F Chan | 42:19
Much. You.
Haiver | 42:32
Yeah. Like... Reflecting back on that, like, Cool. Is this the thing you recommend at this stage?
Like, when does it fit in an artist's trajectory? And when is it something you don't want to consider or don't want to take on the burden of?
Mitchell F Chan | 42:49
Okay, so school, I would say my biggest regret about SAIC, about doing my master's degree at a fancy, expensive university, which I could not have afforded to go to, you know, had I not gotten that award. My biggest regret is that I didn't go to more parties. To be honest, I really had this idea that this is my one shot. I'm so lucky to be here. I'm going to just live at my desk the whole time. And to be honest, I treated it a lot like a... I treated it a lot like being at a technical college, like really, because it is a school, they have a lot of facilities there. And I was like, okay, I got to learn how to do all this stuff because I'm not going to have access to this in two years, right?
So I mean, I was like, I mean, I was working in the neon shop, like blowing and bending neon glass, right? I was like working in the aluminum welding shop Did I ever get good at that? Hell no. But I was trying. And you know, like all this kind of stuff. And I was doing that a lot more than I was doing. I stayed away. I didn't do a lot of reading, to be honest. I didn't do a lot of theory. I did not sign up for a lot of theory class. And I did not sign up for a lot of seminars. Because I had the attitude like, I can read books. On my own time, right?
Like libraries are everywhere. And kinetics and robotics labs are not. And I debated for a long time whether that was the right decision or not. Because like I said, I came out of school and okay, I was, you know, again, really good at building clever machines. But... As you've established, building a clever machine doesn't make you an artist. A clever machine is not an artwork.
So I was like shit, maybe I should have read more books with like a smart professor that were there, or maybe I should have made more friends while I was there. I didn't make a lot of friends while I was there, partially because I knew I was going back to Canada after I was done, right? But in the end, ultimately, it worked out. I think that if you can, a lot of that could be You can essentially save yourself a lot of money from art school, I think, if you can do a couple of things. One, get commercial work right work in a commercial field if you're a 3d artist like whatever do art assets for a video game studio or something like that because then you'll have access to tooling right you'll have access to facilities stuff that you didn't normally have so you'll get that you'll get the experience that you need of being able to crank stuff out which you don't get at art school anyway because they're like really supportive of you like dicking around and doing nothing, if that's what you feel like, they will really support your own self-destruction. In art school if you allow them to. Read books on your own. And the most important thing is like through, you know, look, the people who are in this cohort right now for Artist Commons, like stick together and chat, you know, like be each other's, fine, like it doesn't have to be everybody, but if you find other people who do similar work, that person is not your that person is your life preserver, like out here in this ocean of the art world, right?
So like stick to each other, man. Like help each other out, exchange ideas and steal ideas from each other and tell each other that you're doing that, right? It's like man, this thing you do. I'm going to steal this and remix it like that. And all that does is add to the value of the original idea, right? And don't get... Too hung up on when your success is not exactly simultaneous.
Like these things work out like that. Eventually it all balances out.
So you can save yourself a lot of money from art school doing that and like read books on your own time and whatever. I think, you know.
Yeah.
Haiver | 46:50
Yeah. I wish I had made more friends in college and gone to more parties.
So I think for many of us creatives, it ends up being this way, but we like working really hard. It's we're certain type A types.
Mitchell F Chan | 47:02
So for a reason. Yeah.
Haiver | 47:04
So one other question was about... Right. You're describing getting work through public commissions and that work is, I mean, that is steady work when you have it, but it takes a lot of time and applications and negotiating to end up in the position where you have that job to be the steady thing. What were you doing to handle the down points between jobs and how are you navigating trying to make it a steady thing?
Mitchell F Chan | 47:31
Just responsible fiscal planning. So yeah, you know that you might be in between gigs. And while you're in between gigs, that's when you're working on you know, with an eye to them being portfolio development projects, it happens. And of course, like there's, you know, there's like a weaning period. At the beginning, you know, at the beginning of that public art practice, I was you know, I had an administrative job, you know, so I had an administrative job and the public art practice and my gallery practice.
And then eventually, like, it was a few years before the public art thing took off that I could quit the administrative job. And then I just had the public art practice and my own gallery work. And always feeling bad that I could really only produce, like, one gallery show, like, per year or whatever. But, That's fine, it's going to happen.
And then finally, the gallery stuff picked up where I ditched the public art practice. And that's just, you know, so things happen in phases like that. Before I moved to Toronto in 2006, I knew that I wanted to do this. I knew I wanted to try to be an artist. I knew I was going to have to save up some money so that I could just kind of fart around Queen Street West for a little bit.
So I just nose to the ground. So I worked I did. And human resources at the passport office for a year, you know, just to like save up money. Lived with my parents, saved up money from my human resources at Passport Canada job for a year.
So it's government jobs, man. They're the best paying jobs you could get.
So.
Haiver | 49:07
Yeah. Good.
Well, let's jump into the second half then.
Mitchell F Chan | 49:12
Okay. So that was...
So, all right, thus concludes the chapter on Mitch Chan, origins. All right, and now. Act 2. Okay, so as this stuff is going on, I have this interest in technology. And all this stuff is sort of, I mean, I haven't shown, I guess this is kind of the only tech art project that I've shown. But you know, I'm You know, I've been experimenting with coding. It's just like at this point, actually in 2013, right, was actually when I made my first like algorithmic Sol LeWitt piece that had been exhibited around. And this piece right here, like this piece was really about... And the ways that the internet and social media was shaping society political discourse, right? Again, shaping political discourse as insubstantial antagonism. Never before had the discourse been so antagonistic, and never before had it been based on so little substance. And so, okay, like discourse is a thing, technology's impact on discourse is a thing that I want to talk about.
And then, you know, I want to talk about technologies, Influence in shaping our financial system and our notions of financial value. So this was 2017. And I won't go into this project too much because of all my projects, this is by far the one that I've spoken about the most on the internet and on podcasts and whatever. But in 2017, this cryptocurrency thing is like, it's starting to feel like a real thing.
Some stuff is blowing up. And it's kind of interesting. And you can can see a connection to between, I'd established the idea of immateriality as one of the things I'm working with, right?
Like I said, you know, remember I said this was the least amount of substance that I could use to like make a sculpture? And it is, like it's water vapor. And so some of this actually... Was a challenge of me of like, how can I make an artwork of even less substance than this, right? I was really on my way to being like the invisible art guy, the immaterial art guy. And this leads me to a couple of things. One is like, okay, so I made... A sculpture? About political discourse out of clouds, man, like, you know, what's another thing that really shapes the world around us?
Well, that would be the financial world. And then what is even less substantial than clouds? And that would be like bits and bytes of data. And what great timing to have like gone from to trying to make less substantial things at a time when Bitcoin is really taking off. And this is this notion of value that is untethered to any physical aspect. And so I'm here now. It's like, all right, this thing has even less substance than clouds of water vapor. And... There's something to be said here. Then I discovered Ethereum. And this was very exciting for me because if I could program smart contracts on Ethereum, that meant, okay, great. Now I really should make a project about cryptocurrency because... With programmable, with a smart contract programming language, cryptocurrency can be not just the subject of an artwork, but its medium. If you can program it, you can shape it. These are things that probably most of the people in this cohort take for granted, but it was like kind of a like ding, lights on moment for me in 2017. Now let's talk about some basic kind of elements of conceptual art. For me, it's really helpful too when you are trying to really analyze something new and talk about something new that people really struggle to understand. It is like, it is a really good idea to create an understanding of that by relating it back to something that exists already and the people already understand, right? It would have been very useless for me to make an artwork about cryptocurrency that was speaking about it in all new ways. Terms, right, or that was speaking about it impressionistically or anything like that. If what you are trying to do is help define a thing that is yet to be defined, you give it another referent in the world. And because I am an artist and I know my artwork is going to be perceived and like seen by art people, then I'm going to try to find an art world referent to explain cryptocurrency. And I found that referent in Yves Klein's project, The Zones of Immaterial Pictorial Sensibility. I won't jump entirely into it, but this was the idea Yves Klein had in 1958, where he sold invisible artworks that he said contained images. The feeling of an artwork, the sensibility of an artwork. And that was the only thing that the artwork was. He believed that ultimately, what an artwork's ultimate purpose was to transmit a feeling or a sensation from me, the artist, to you, the viewer. And the canvas is kind of an imperfect intermediary for that transaction. And how, and therefore the ultimate artwork would be one where that intermediary was removed and it was just... My idea, my sensibility directly to you. And so these were the artworks that he, where he presented that idea. They were invisible. They were some amount of space that existed somewhere that contained his idea for the artwork. You had to kind of buy into this idea. The climb was... Clyde was such a brilliant artist. And if there is one thing about him that I tried to emulate, it is that he was simultaneously very... Spiritual And he truly believed in, I think, the higher calling and spirituality of his artwork. And he understood so well the practicalities and vulgarities of the real world. The media world, and the art world. Through which those spiritual ideas had to travel. And he reconciled these two sides of him very well. And he understands that to be an artwork, One of the things that an artwork has to do is it has to exist as a financialized commodity. And so therefore, he couldn't just say, you know, yeah, release some feelings into the world today. Check it out. That simply won't do. For this to be an artwork, it has to be for sale.
So he comes up with these receipts, and these are what people buy. And I think this is such an incredible inversion of what cryptocurrency is about, right? And I realized at that point that a Bitcoin, the value of a Bitcoin is simply A precise measurement of all of the belief in Bitcoin that exists in the world at that particular time. And it's funny, right? Because I think that was more true in 2017 than it is now. And it almost certainly wasn't even perfectly true in 2017, but it was a really nice idea. And so I feel like, okay, if I can just create tokens, blockchain tokens, thanks Ethereum, let me do that.
You know, of my own artwork, my own feelings, my own ideas about an artwork, then, you know, I'll demonstrate the ways that any cryptocurrency is basically like all of Klein's statements about what gives something value. Right? Have come true. Now that's just mainstream. Klein believing, no, the idea of something and someone's belief in this artwork is the only thing that gives it value. We can skip the physical stage. And that was a radical idea in 1958. It's just how the world works now, man. Bitcoin is like, no, Bitcoin is just as valuable because this many people believe in it. We can skip the physical part altogether. All we need is a clear accounting of who has how much belief. We're good, right?
So I do this. And so the funny thing about this is obviously the ERC-721 didn't exist yet. The term NFT didn't exist yet. I know that this is a really... I think this is a clever idea at the time. 2017, I'm convinced. I think it's kind of a clever idea. I think it's kind of funny. I think it's a little bit insightful. And I just... And I've never done this with an artwork before, but I felt like it was really important that I write down all the ideas and I explain the history because I know this is complicated. I know this is a complicated idea.
So it took 33 pages. I wrote a 33-page essay called The Blue Paper. And it says, this is the history of Yves Klein's project, because some people might not know that. And this is the history of Bitcoin, because a lot of people might not know that. And here's the history of Ethereum. And here's the way these things go together. And it was almost like incidental that I made a smart contract to really put these ideas in practice. And the way to do it, like... In some ways, it was dead simple because the work was... It was laid out for me. Eve Klein documented really well how his immaterial artworks were to be transacted, for how much money and all of the receipts had to be sold on a bonding curve. And most importantly, each one was numbered. And this was important because it made sure that these were, and I never would have used the word non-fungible back then. I was barely familiar with that term. But these were unique artworks, right? It was important that this chunk of feeling here is yours. And this chunk of feeling over here It was yours and it was important those were distinct.
So all I did was I started with the ERC-20 contract as my base and I had all of Yves Klein's rules for how his receipts were released over here and I had to turn this... Into that, right? And so, okay, I had to come up with a system for, all right, each token obviously has to be indivisible, and we need a record-keeping system of who has which one. And so even long before ERC-721, I created what amounted to a 101- edition NFT-like series, conceptual series. This was, you know, I mean, which I thought was cool. And the fact that later on, NFTs became a thing.
And then NFT historians discovered this project and they were like, this is one of the first like NFT projects art projects, you know, kind of ever made. And to me, that just proved that Yves Klein's original zones of immaterial pictorial sensibility, like those are the first non-fungible token art works ever. These are receipts, numbered receipts that were given out that, you know, relate to an artwork that exists somewhere else in the cloud, you know, like that was it. That's the model. For non-fungible token artworks. It was quite, and it was really cool. Once all the NFT stuff took off, you know, I was able to interact and work with Eve Klein's estate and foundation to kind of advance that idea a little bit and speak about it a little bit. And, you know, I got to make a tiny little contribution to like, yeah, the legacy of, you know, the Probably, I think, my favorite artist of all time. That was really cool. But anyway, that's going ahead a little bit. Point is, I unveiled this 2017. I'm like, sure. I'm like, damn, I think this is pretty clever.
So I arranged to... I present it at, remember I mentioned I learned all my tech stuff at Interaccess Media Arts Center here in Toronto.
So I set up there, I talked to the curator there or like the education program. I was like, hey, can I do a lecture here? I want to unveil this project.
So I did this hour and a half long lecture. And in front of everybody, I made the contract live and I minted the first one and whatever. Two things happened. One is that between me wrapping up the project... And doing the lecture, CryptoPunks came out, which was like, and I was so angry at the time. I was like, fuck, I'm doing this really meaningful, significant art project. And they kind of had this thing come out before me. And, you know, it was again, ended up being a lesson in getting over yourself.
You know, I never stopped learning a lesson about getting over myself. It's something that I am working on constantly. And so, yeah, so I missed out on that.
And then and I did it, I did the whole presentation and like nobody really cared. Like there are people following along on their laptop, but nobody really cared. But that was okay. I thought it was quite clever. And I was quite proud of the project. But then obviously, you know, the NFT thing happened and all of this stuff happened.
And then, you know, all this stuff happened. And then, you know, that project ends up, you know, in the Venice Biennale, which is the top left image here, exhibited with the original Yves Klein portrait. Pieces, and with like Marcel Duchamp's Monte Carlo bonds. And that was just amazing.
And then it was, you know, it's an art science museum in Singapore and, you know, in Berlin, And I guess one of the points of that is, so I've talked a little bit about how I thought about that artwork and what my thought process was in making that conceptual artwork. And again, it was just like the thought process was To be as... Clear as possible with a little bit of a sense of humor. And that was the goal. The goal wasn't to obfuscate this issue or to mythologize it or to talk about how great cryptocurrency was. If you read that paper, it's really left open to for the reader to still, they can go through that whole paper and still decide that crypto is a scam. It's just pointing out that you can decide that Eve Klein's artwork is a scam. And I kind of leave my opinion out of it, Like, obviously, I believed and I went in being dubious and skeptical of Yves Klein's project. And I ultimately decided that, no, he was like very sincere. And this is like profound and meaningful. And therefore, like, I apply the same you know, the same idea as cryptocurrency. But, you know, it just kind of wanted to be like clear, rigorous and scientific about it.
And then you choose to aestheticize your presentation and in a certain way. That is why I like with conceptual art, the aesthetics still are very important. I obviously needed to have the most minimal aesthetic possible, right? Which means having no physical form. And the aesthetics of it is essentially a fairly dry paper with some dry humor in it. Those were the stylistical choices that I was making in presenting those ideas. A lot of times, conceptual artists are underrated aestheticists.
You know, one example I use like Stevie P has a vastly underrated aesthetic sense. He like intuitively understands the aesthetics of kind of scam artists and like that internet culture. He employs it really well. And that's actually, and if he didn't, his artworks would be much less successful. Someone like Simon Denny has a very astute sense of aesthetics, where he can ape the kind of industrial, like, technical diagram style of...
Like the businesses that he's spoofing and know enough to like put his hand in only at the parts that are completely necessary. So the aesthetics of conceptual art are actually quite important. And they're just applied out in the tendrils.
Like they're just kind of applied in the zone just outside of artwork, if that makes any sense, right? You create an aesthetic buffer around your idea, even if it's not part of the artwork proper. And that teaches the audience how to engage properly with your idea.
So that's pretty important. Okay, so that was the... That was the... Digital art thing. Dang, we only got 20 minutes left. Okay, great.
Yeah, so that was that. And then it's worth saying that I have not done really any blockchain concept. I have not done much blockchain conceptual art. Since then. And that's just, you know, my decision, which is like. To apply this To really apply this in practical terms, I'm trying as much as possible to speak with real world examples and not speak in vagueness about like, innovation is always just an inspiration away and critical thinking is a muse. No. In practical terms, it's like, you know, like I'm sitting at the AI thing. I'm sitting out the AI thing because there are a ton of other people who at least believe that they have important things to say about it. And like, the truth is like, if this is, if I had something really smart to say about AI, I got bad news.
Like, it's kind of too late. Like it's just, it's too late. It's such noise out there. And it's just like, there's not a lot, like, even if I had the most important smartest thing to say, it just gets lost in the noise. And one of the things that was really good about...
You know, doing digital zones when I did it is that, Nobody cared. Okay. And so then when people started to care, that text already existed and it was there to help people who were trying to enter this world. And it was there to like, it was kind of a guiding light for people from the crypto world who are trying to understand art and maybe conceptual art because they had this vague idea that all their Bitcoins were like a conceptual art project and this helped them to understand that when they needed it. And all these art curators and stuff who all of a sudden now had to figure out what crypto was and how they could curate a show of it without being like considered like you know vulgar, you know, hyper-capitalist or whatever, this text could be a guiding light for them when they needed it. And I just feel like Once the discourse has sort of exploded, society will fill in the gaps of all the things that we need to understand something and we'll get all the takes and it will be fine. And I think that it's.. Gosh, man, one of the big pet peeves.
You know this artist. You know this artist. I'm not talking about any artist in specific. You understand this archetype of artist. The artists who every time something happens in society, they gotta like pipe it up on Twitter to let you know they have like the perfect take about it and that actually like their artwork explains this concept perfectly. And it's just...
You know? I go my whole life. Only having one really smart insight on, you know, a world changing technology. Did okay.
You know, they did okay. It's fine. It's fine, man. I'm not trying to dominate the TED Talk circle here. And neither are you. You're just trying to be an artist, you know? I think that the overlap of the TED Talk circle to the artist's career, it's a little bit dangerous. And it can lead you down a garden path.
So let's go into the things that I am doing. I'm not doing a... Not doing a lot of conceptual artwork anymore because I feel like, you know, that not a lot of meat left on that bone. Video games.
So basically when Digital Zones took off and I was really fortunate, I had some critical attention. And finally, I had some art institutional people who were in my corner. And, you know, and I had like a little bit of money to buy, to build myself a buffer between me There is now, there is a nice little buffer of money between me and anything I didn't want to do. Anything I didn't want to do could stay over there. It was fine. I was insulated by it. I had a little bit of money. And that's what you use money for. And... And I was really fortunate that, you know, I mean, all that stuff was happening after I'd made bad artwork for 10 years, after I'd had 10 years of doing commercial work and learned a little bit to get over myself.
You know, in my personal life, you know, I had a family and that's like really good to help you understand the things that matter. That's another thing that I highly recommend if you're into that. If you're into that kind of thing, go for it. Long term, I think it's great. And I wanted to make video games for a long time. And just about everybody who's ever gotten into any type of art I was getting into it for the wrong reasons. I began this lecture by saying, let's demythologize this idea that somebody knows exactly what they're doing when they get into it.
Like, nope, did not grow up with parents who taught it bird. Okay, like, nope.
Like, did not read Noam Chomsky when I was 12 years old. None of that stuff, right? You go into video games, and I think most people go into video games for this reason, which is the wrong reason. I think artists go into video games because it's like more. Because it's just like video games are just extra. All right. If you are really enjoying making, like if it was 2021 and you were really enjoying making like videos of spinning 3D models that you saw as NFTs, man, you are going to love video games because you get to make like not just the model and you get to not just make it spin, man, you can make like you press buttons and it spins faster. You can design like a world around the artwork. And you know, a lot of artists get caught up into this thing.
I mean, you know, like people want to be artists for shitty reasons a lot of the time. And that's fine, by the way, because people get better and You just get better by continuing to do it and doing it honestly and having a sense of humor about yourself. But, you know, people get into art because they, like, you know, want to be, like, something akin to a god and be the shaper of worlds and experience real, you know what it's like to just experience true creation. Blah. Man man, real-time 3D environments get you all of that. But it's not actually, that motivation doesn't actually lead to a good artwork. It really doesn't. It's like, there's just like, hey, I'm an artist. My art, you know, normally in art, like I, you know, I make some stuff and you can look at it and it's cool. And now look, now you can stand in front of a screen and press forward to walk around a whole bunch of my stuff. And it's not that great. And most of the bad video game art that we see is like that. Bad video game art is made by even great artists. One of the best examples of bad video game art that I like to use, and I like to use this because this artist is, I think, just unimpeachably good and celebrated, and so it's not punching down, but like Bill Viola. Okay, Bill Veal, arguably the world's most celebrated video artist, pioneer of that. He made a video game with USC Game Lab. You can download it on your PlayStation. It's not called the Nightwatch. It's called The Night Something. And it just sucks, right? It's just like a build Viola video that you can walk around in. But because you can walk around in it, that means that it literally doesn't have a point of view.
Right? That's the thing. The job of being a video artist is you literally present a point of view. I don't mean editorially. I don't mean in terms of like, this is what I think about democracy, man. It's just you put a camera there, you decide what goes in the frame. And so to relinquish that power means you haven't composed anything, right? You've just created a bunch of conditions that the viewer can fuck up, right? They can at best... Move themselves into a point of view that's as good as a Bill Viola artwork, and then they can go and fuck it all up, right? That leads me to A really interesting point about, okay, so that's how you make bad Video game art. How do you make good video game art? Well... And by the way, as I go into this isn't supposed to be a talk about how to make video game art and you should go and make video game art. I hope as you listen to this, you hear the thought processes of what I think are an artist's intrinsic motivations behind making bad art and making good art, right? And so just the desire to be extra and do more. And look, you're seeing this as a recurring theme throughout this talk. It's just usually wrong. The machine that I made in grad school that was super extra I milled them. By myself. I milled those bushings. And it wasn't better artwork, right? And the video artist who just makes, it's 360 degree video and you can walk to anywhere you want in the video, that's not better art. But... But... Person's ability to screw up your art. Now that is interesting. And what a person will do with their agency All right, their ability to make decisions Now that is interesting. That is really interesting. And that's where video game art becomes really interesting, becomes really good. And, you know, actually, I don't have to spend too much time on these slides because I think most of you played some of my artworks in your Sunday session.
So if I'm just flipping through these slides really quickly, then it's because I trust you've done a lot of this. I'll leave this video up because this is probably a game that you haven't played or whatever.
So that's what's really interesting is playing with how a person chooses to make decisions in your software, in your artwork, right? And that was the thing that I realized. And that was how my video game art started to get a lot better. Actually, you know what? Let's do a fun thing. Actually, let's show... Let's show The total progression. Right.
You know, Haveri, I hope you like this because I prepared this... Darn. I didn't. Actually, I didn't take gameplay video. I forgot that when I started this, I made a little demo. And I only shared it with like 12 friends. And this was literally just me learning to use the video game engine and trying to imagine what like digital art as a video game might be for me and how it might fit in with NFTs or whatever. And I totally forgot about this. I made this in 2022. The link is up there. Don't do it now. We'll have this talk, but go up there. I forgot that I had left this online. I forgot to delete it. And since it's here, you might as well learn from it. And it's like, and I played it through as I was preparing this video And it's kind of funny and it's not like... It's not a good artwork or anything. And it still has a lot of these ideas of just trying to do extra and creating a world and creating, like, you know, all this extra stuff around things. But you can see what is, like, a well-meaning... But ultimately flawed implementation of this technology looks like for an artist. And there are things I'm really proud of because I think that this is flawed in charming ways and in ways I'll totally own.
Like I'll totally own the ways that this doesn't work. But you can go and check this out on your own time. This is it. This is a Artist Commons exclusive, like the demo that I made.
Anyway, but look, this is the first video game that I've...
Haiver | 01:18:08
I'm pretty sure that's the first game of yours I ever played. Really? You.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:18:13
Actually played it? You're one of the very few. I think you're one of the very few. And it was just like, it was just dicking around, trying things out. And that's one of the best things you can do as an artist. Really release yourself from the need to, release yourself from the need to create a masterpiece.
Like give yourself, like alternate between like, Masterpiece and just dicking around. Masterpiece, dicking around. Things will go so much better. What I always do before I start a new project is I honestly just do an online tutorial on a tool that I'm interested in because it gets me moving, right? It gets me exercising and there's no expectation to be genius or to be brilliant. I'm just in the flow of creating. And you know what? When like, if you've done enough stuff, you'll be, a lot of times you won't even finish the tutorial, you'll be two thirds of the way through it. And you'll think, if I screwed up this part, that would be really interesting.
And then you kind of led yourself off into the next project. But the most important thing is to begin something without the expectation of making something brilliant or good or meaningful. You're just creating because the man in the YouTube video tells me to put the box on top of the sphere and that's what you do.
And then you get an idea, whatever. This is my first video game and it's like, you know, hey, honestly, this is, I'm proud of this, but I'm still experimenting with this artwork began, it's commissioned by Buffalo AKG. They wanted me to make an artwork that responded to a piece in their collection. And so I wanted to respond to this. And I mean, I knew I was doing this. It's kind of funny in a sense. I'm like, all right, let's actually just start with the most basic thing.
Like the dumbest, most basic way that an artist would want to create a video game artwork. Let's start with artwork, or let's start with a painting. And we'll turn it into an artwork. And so you see how the first frame of the video came is just the painting. And don't worry, I know that's cheesy and I know that's corny, but one of the things I've learned as an artist is to, okay, no, accept it as the baseline and then push it out from there. Hopefully you'll get to leave that baseline behind, but like, it's the obvious thing to do for a reason.
Like there's a reason why that's the most obvious thing to do. Start there. That's your baseline. Move along.
So anyway, this piece becomes about Like I said, I won't get too much into the meaning of any of these individual artworks, but it's a lot of that. Like, this is literally a painting made extra. And as I was making this, I started to add on, I started to develop my ideas about art, what video game art should be.
Like, the idea that, no, I'm only going to give the player control over this one aspect of the game. Of what's going on in the frame. The only thing you have control of in this game is hitting the balls. And by hitting by trapping somebody's agency inside that little boundary of the game, I've thought about how a user wants to engage with the artwork. And my art is really all about what I put outside where they can, outside of... The things they can mess up. What I put outside of the user's control, that's the artwork. And the distinction between what is under the user's control and what is not, that is the artwork. And so as making this game, I started to realize that's my real medium that I get in making video games. Because a lot of people, when they think about making video games, you know, I said that, you know, it's because they want to be extra. They want to make more. Really, the term that I like to use there is like the Gesamtkunstwerk, right? Which is a term that I'm borrowing from Wagner and I'm borrowing from opera. But the truth is that the reason why a lot of artists want to make video games, and this is applicable not just to video games, right? It's because... Video games are... Modern day opera All right, you know, Richard Wagner, all right, working in the 19th century, he believes that opera is the ultimate art form because it's set design, right, and aesthetics, and it's sound, and it's poetry in the libretto, and it is for him even designing the opera house at Bayreuth.
So it is architecture. The art forms. And so it's all coming together and he is the ultimate art artist and this complete art. And that's why people want to make this. And again, you can check this theory against other forms of art too.
Like, it's why like an artist like wants to put a skull on a grand piano, you know, it's like, cause they believe it's like this ultimate form of art and that's not actually true. No, you can't just do all the arts. You can't do all the arts without a point. And when you do all the arts, eventually they all need to be in support of one specific thing. That is your real medium. Everything has to be to reinforce something. And what I learned after making a couple of video games that the real medium is the user's It is their control and everything is in support of that.
So then once I get to there, then I'm learning graphics design. Then I'm learning graphics that reinforce what a user thinks they have control over and what they don't, what is literally in their line of sight and what is not.
So you see that in Xantar. You saw in Xantar you had control over the gelatinous cube and you did not have control over that boy's life. And you didn't realize what you didn't have control over in the beginning. And so all the things I'm learning doing graphics, and look at how everything works. All of the types of art that come to bear in Xantar are about that. There are two different graphic styles. Okay, I had to learn two different graphic styles because I need to contrast what you have control over and what you don't have control over. The cinematography is in support of that phenomenon, right? It's all in support of one thing. It's not just about having a mishmash of all the artworks. And so that's, you know, and I think that that's the key point. Of of what I'm trying to say about as you expand out into doing more and more of the arts and what digital art, what I think is the next frontier of digital art. Because right now we're at this moment where AI is making everything possible. And so you can go full maximalist right now. You can do all the arts. You can make a digital art project that has all the arts in it. You'll have composed the music and you'll have designed all the graphics and all of this stuff. And it's only really... Matters if you know what your artwork is about and, you know, kind of, have everything pointing in the same direction. And I firmly believe you only figure that out by actually building putting your hands into the material, you know, and figuring out what is the poetic and metaphoric potential that your medium has. I think that's going to be the real risk of creating with AI. It's so easy to make everything extra, but it's all pointing in different directions. And the kind of getting over myself and self-awareness and honesty that I've learned to have about my media really only happens by... It's never, ever happened by... Just getting instant success from an AI cranking out my idea. It's only happened from like putting all the work into the idea and then like failing at it and failing at it, you know, and that's the really invaluable experience. And that's pretty much our 90 minutes, right?
Haiver | 01:26:29
That is, yeah. It's really fantastic to hear the arc here happen. Thank you so much for being with us this quarter and diving into thinking about, I think agency and choice is really fascinating when we walk into a gallery setting.
Right? Experience.
You know, what the artist has given us, but we do have a lot of choice, right? Am I looking at this? Am I walking toward it and getting closer? Am I walking away from it? And we don't really think about that agency. We think about like, did it pique my curiosity? But we don't think of ourselves as, Users and like a UX kind of user experience term here.
So it's fun to see that actualized in your games.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:27:11
So I'll tell you what. It's 1:29 on my clock, and I don't want to kill anyone's time. One minute. Do you want to do a world preview of the newest artwork that I think ties together a lot of these themes? All right, we're here. And everyone, I was scrambling to get some stuff done. I told you... One of the most important things you can do is simplify, right?
So I'm on a video game rumspringa right now, just in the sense, always take time in between your projects and your media because you need some distance to figure out, was that project any good and what I would do later? It's too, without a few months of separation.
So I couldn't do another video game right after I did Lady Boss and Xantar. It's too soon after. I had to do something different.
So I decided to make some physical artworks, right? And, I want to say on practical terms, I think doing physical artworks remains important, especially for the market right now, just to be honest. And so I said, simplify, right? I still want to make video games. I do love the extra of software-based art. I love it. I love doing all that work as long as it can all point in the same direction and so it's not obvious. It's all got to be like that cloud sculpture where all the complicated technical stuff is hidden away so it doesn't draw attention to itself. But I want to make something extra simple, all right? And so I want to make these things about games. This is the latest work.
So I made these physical artworks. Can you zoom in a little bit for people so they can see? Do you have that ability? All right. Man, these pinball machines. I made this pinball machine.
Right? I was like, how can I make a physical video game? All right. And it has to be able to age. And these games are fully interactive. See?
So you can go up to them and... Way in the... - It doesn't matter. You hit the flippers. It makes the flippers go. But the game. But it has no impact whatsoever on hitting the bumper score.
So this is what I'm working on right now. And it's a distillation and a simple... And it's funny, like not technologically, all right? But in every other way, right? It just means I've learned what are the ideas that were in my video game.
Like this is just sculptural version of Lady Boss, right? It's just a game that goes on forever, whether you're there or not. It doesn't care about you. And the amount of interactivity that you have is so...
So irrelevant, right? And it's really fun. And this is, for me, an exercise in simplifying and distilling down what I have to do. Physical artwork is fun. It's fun to make things and fail at it and do stuff that AI can't do.
So that's really fun. And there you go.
So we'll end with the... Preview of the latest thing in studio.
Haiver | 01:30:19
That's really exciting. I love seeing you return to your physical roots. - Well, we obviously got a lot of inspiration here. We're getting a lot of hearts and clapping here.
So thank you from the students. - I wish Yeah, it's enthusiastic as always when you speak.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:30:34
You could see it, I'm not on Zoom.
Haiver | 01:30:40
So we're really lucky to have you here. I love this.
So cool. Insane. Those are the most recent responses. Students, if you have questions, feel free to drop them in the Art Lecture Discussion channel within the app. Mitchell's going to be joining.
Soon and we'll be able to respond to some questions there and obviously just start banking your questions for our candid interview at the end of our session but otherwise we'll see mitchell in two weeks for our craft workshop all right thank you so much for being here we'll see you soon thanks everyone Okay, so that's a wrap on Mitchell. Thank you so much, everyone, for your great cohort feedback sessions this week. It was really fun to practice going through the structure of how we want to do feedback. And I think it was really rich for a lot of people. And I will see many of you starting Sunday through Wednesday next week for your next cohort feedback session. Make sure you drop in the material that you want workshop 24 to 48 hours before it's your turn to workshop so people have time to spend with it.
And then we'll be back on Tuesday at 1:30 p.m. Eastern Time, so a little later than our usual start time, with Professor Sarah Rothberg, who teaches at ITP, For any of the creative coders in the room, ITP is the program that Daniel Schiffman teaches in as well. Sarah is an incredible artist. She had a solo show at Bitform's gallery last year that was just really incredible. She's going to come do some exercises that she does with her students at NYU's program focused on craft, creativity, getting ourselves unblocked in how we approach our art making practice.
So thanks again for being here and we'll see you soon. Bye now.