Haiver | 00:00
Hi, everyone. Today is going to be a fun and hopefully illuminating session, we're going to dive into how to build a portfolio This is a very fresh off the presses... I never got to do this for any of my undergrads because we did it over a length of time in which all the information was parceled out, you know, in 10 minutes here, 20 minutes there.
So I really enjoyed playing this together for you all. So let's dive in because there's a lot to cover and I will hopefully still have time at the end for that.
So. How to build a portfolio. A portfolio is not an archive. It's not a record of everything you've ever made. And it's not a history of your work. It's not to capture every little step along the way. It's strangely not a greatest hits list, in which you throw out your best pieces you've ever done with no context, disconnected from one another. What a portfolio is at heart is a design viewing experience with a beginning, middle, and end. And this is probably the most important sentence I'm going to say today, which is that a portfolio is an edited selection of your best work designed for a specific viewer and a specific purpose.
So this is something that you make not for showing everything that you can do. It's about making it easy to understand who you are as an audience, who you are as an artist for a specific audience.
So your portfolio is a portable temporary exhibition in that way of your current thinking as an artist. And the reason we don't focus on the archive and thinking of it as an archive is that You're thinking, hopefully as an artist, evolves over time. And the things that you use your portfolio to do, to apply to opportunities, you want to demonstrate who you are right now. That's the person that they're accepting into the program, not someone from five to ten years ago.
So you're not simply gathering images, let alone all your images, you're constructing an experience. So this should communicate both your capability and direction as an artist. Most contexts expect a curated set, often that's 10 to 20 images for submissions. It's not an endless pile for someone to try and make sense of. You're making your portfolio for busy people to look at. And by curating what you show, you're helping them Give an easy yes.
So you want to put your audience and purpose first. An archive is there to preserve. A portfolio persuades. Your portfolio is a tool that helps others make a decision. To invite you, to hire you, to fund you. To exhibit you. It took me a long time as an artist to get to the place where I could recognize, my archive, there's other places where my archive should live and show the breadth of what I do. But my portfolio is really there to persuade people to make a decision in my favor for the thing that I'm applying for.
So the portfolio changes with the ask. You have no one definitive portfolio anymore. If you've operated that way for a long time, this is, I think, a really important realization.
So you customize your portfolio to your audience. So you need to know and research your audience just like you would if you were applying for a job. Each of these groups has a different set of needs and criteria The underlying works may remain the same, but the selection and sequencing may shift. This doesn't mean you're misrepresenting yourself. It means that you are understanding your audience and what they need and trying to meet them on those terms and show how you're the best fit for that. Need of theirs. It means recognizing that different aspects of your practice may be more relevant in different situations and presenting them accordingly.
So the key question to ask yourself is, What decision do I want them to make after five minutes with my work? What decision do I want them to make after five minutes with my work? And that key question should guide all of the decisions you make. Right, because if a reviewer only has five minutes, What do you want them to understand about you as an artist, about your practice, what you're about? Again, that's not putting in everything, right? It's something specific and clear. And I hope that this question serves as a guide for what to include in your portfolio and what to leave out. Your portfolio has to survive Fragmented attention. The viewer does not encounter your work in a neutral space. They encounter it through the lens of their own responsibilities and constraints.
So again, like applying for a job where you tailor your cover letter and resume for each position, you do the same with your portfolio so that person who's literally just doing their job, right? They're looking for particular things and they're skimming it quickly, jumping forward and backward and comparing applicants rapidly to view probably dozens or even hundreds of applications in quick succession. That should change. The way that we design our portfolio because we want to Again, make ourselves an easy yes for people who have responsibilities and their own full, busy lives. We're not getting our idealized patient viewer in most situations. You want to curate your portfolio with recent work, If the portfolio is an exhibition, than editing in a lot of ways as a curatorial act. And that exhibition shouldn't be a hodgepodge, right? We select work that speaks in a chorus. Another way of saying that is that it speaks with a unified voice. It all seems to come from the same person exploring the same questions, the same intent.
So a portfolio should represent your current practice, not your entire history. And the portfolio answers the question, who is this artist today? Older work can definitely show up in portfolios. But when older work appears, it should feel like part of the same trajectory, not like an artifact from a different identity. And again, this is about the fact that we grow as artists and we change, and not everything is a part of our current practice. And it doesn't even necessarily make sense in mapping out the arc or through line of our current practice.
So if a piece feels like it belongs to a different artist, it probably doesn't belong in your portfolio regardless of how successful or important it once was. Most portfolios function best when they include one or two recent bodies of work in depth. And possibly one older work one older body of work that clearly leads into them. What should be avoided is a portfolio that feels like a timeline of unrelated phases. And depending on how long you've been working as an artist, That issue feels more or less relevant to you depending on your practice. You may only have a handful of bodies of work to pull from at this stage. But as artists did their presentations over the last few weeks, and showed where they had been working as artists, I think some of us experienced a trajectory of growth. And as we think about what goes in the portfolio, this is really important to start to learn what to leave out given a specific goal or audience or purpose that we're applying to. And I think it can get really easy to get hung up on the recency question. And I think I fall into the trap of asking how old is this piece as like the benchmark. When really the question should be, If I made this last month, would I include it? Does it feel like it's a part of your current practice? Even if you've grown as an artist in your skill, is it part of the, and this belongs to an earlier period, does this belong to the line of inquiry or the questions or themes that I'm continuing to explore currently?
So it's not an age thing for the peas, it's a relevancy. Question. Recent work matters structurally for a few key reasons. One, recent work shows where your thinking is now. Reviewers are investing in your future, not your past. They want to see your current trajectory. And two, it reflects your current standards, right? Your technical and conceptual capacity improves over time. Older work often reflects earlier limitations, right? Including it can actually weaken the overall presentation.
So in that way, we have to be honest with ourselves and at times kill our darlings, if you will. And three, Putting recent work in matters because it signals active engagement. A portfolio composed mostly of older work raises this question for a viewer, right? Is this artist still producing at this level today? If I get a portfolio and all the work is from three to five years ago, I have some real questions about what they're doing now. And that's going to make it more difficult for me as a reviewer to say yes to a piece when I look at it.
So, recent work, including recent work in your portfolio, answers that question before it can even be raised. So our process here, right? It's a process of gathering, editing and sequencing.
So first we gather more work than you'll need. Our goal is 10 to 20 final images.
So... Honestly, pulled double that to start. Again, you want to look at where you're sending your portfolio to and what the requirements are, but 10 to 20 is usually a general range that most operate within.
So start with more so you can trim. Pick from recent work first. Focus on bodies of work, not just single pieces. And at this stage, Add in even work that you're uncertain about that The goal is to put work in relationship to each other that you haven't perhaps seen it in relationship to before. And see what connections are there across your bodies of work.
So this stage of gathering is about Again, getting a lot of resources to pull from. You don't want to over edit. While gathering and trim too early.
Though, as soon as we finish gathering our large selection of images, We want to start by cutting the weakest 25%. And remove work that feels unresolved, depends on too much explanation to function and no longer represents you or your thinking, Work that honestly, when you look at it, you hesitate to show. That's usually a good gut check sign. And work that is poorly documented, like you have the photographs of it are low quality and don't hold up next to the other images in your portfolio. Again, You grow and change year to year, and the determining factor is this, right? Do I want them to admit the artist who made this work or the artist who made that work. Editing requires letting go of work you care about. And that's okay. You can continue to care about it. It just isn't aimed at the goals of today where you're sending your portfolio. But doing so, editing strengthens how the remaining work is understood. You don't want to undercut yourself by including something that isn't as strong. In the process of putting all these works side by side, you're going to start seeing connections and identifying the core of your practice. In the process, you want to look for things like recurring materials. Recurring visual language that you use over and over again. Recurring methods. Recurring questions and recurring emotional tone. In this way, cohesion can come from Team... Method, material, questions, and not only style, And I think that's another thing that gets overlooked when we start trying to put together a portfolio. Are these all part of the same style? Your style can evolve over time, but the thing that threads them together, the core of your practice, right, might be one of these other pieces, methods, materials, questions. Emotional tone and visual language.
So these works should form the through line of your portfolio, the ones that you can anchor to one of those topics. Or threads. The most common portfolio failure is not weak work. It's a lack of coherence. An illegible artistic practice. Again, A busy reviewer who's going to look at 100 of these is going to sit down, and they want to try and make sense of you in the first three to five minutes that they're looking at it. And you want to be an easy yes for them, which means that you want to be someone who makes sense, right? Your body of work seen when all your pieces are seen side by side, they seem coherent and they can make sense of your artistic practice and what it is. And oftentimes the reason someone says no isn't because the work is weak. And that should be actually an encouragement to all of us. That if you've sent out to things and gotten turned down, their work can still be strong. But oftentimes the issue in a portfolio is that it just doesn't make sense in the way that it's been organized together. They can't make sense of you. As an artist. I want to tell one short story here as well for just a moment.
So when I was starting out as a film. My first background was in filmmaking and a few years ago, During the pandemic, the Sundance Film Festival went online. That was the only way you could watch the films because of COVID. And so in 2022, when they had to cancel abruptly for Omicron, I got to sit on my couch and I watched every film that played in Sundance that year. This was something like 70 films. No. Between 79 and 82 films, depending on how you counted it, there were a couple TV pilot premieres and about 50, 60 short films that I watched.
So I watched all of it in 17 days. It was delightful. It was a really good way to deal with being suddenly stuck inside again during that uptick. And When it came time for the judges, finally, to award the films at the end of the festival, They gave all the awards to films I didn't agree with. And it was honestly the most liberating thing that has ever happened to me as an artist was to see, like, I know my taste is good. I've watched a lot of films. I've looked at a lot of art. I've worked as a curator.
Like, I trust my taste. And to see jury members who were filmmakers, writers, directors, film critics, people from across the film ecosystem who I think, have good taste. They're on the jury because they've made good things. In the past, pick films I didn't agree with. It was liberating to me because I realized that awards are so arbitrary at the end of the day.
Like the taste of whoever is on that jury is not a reflection of what is good work. Honestly, like the best documentary that year won no awards. And I was like, this is bullshit.
Honestly, and That makes it okay. Like that makes it okay to send out your things to juries and competitions and for opportunities. And when you get turned down, recognize that it is oftentimes almost more about the person who's on the jury and their taste And how they're feeling that day like was it rainy on the day they looked at your thing and your work is sad and they felt sad so they didn't like it because they needed to feel something else.
Like there's so many reasons that a jury or a board of reviewers responds in a way and whether your work is strong is not main benchmark of that. So, Tell you that story to say be free.
You expected. I certainly feel that way now. It's still disappointing, but I feel more free than I did before. Ciao. You should group your work. We've gone through gathering it. We've gone through editing. As we're editing, we're starting to think about sequencing. We want to group our work into two to three bodies or projects. Right. Those bodies or projects should feel internally coherent, They should explore a clear direction, a unified clear direction. And they should contain multiple works within each. Generally speaking, you want to avoid isolated single works that don't have context or clear connection to the whole. You, again, are trying to curate an exhibition and... Isolated works is harder to find coherence.
So every work has to earn its place. And so some questions to ask of each piece as you're trying to decide, is this in or is it getting cut in my edits? All right, is this among my strongest work is the easiest and most obvious one. Does this strengthen the overall portfolio and read as part of my practice? Does this add something new? Right. There's always a danger of having too much repetition within your portfolio. And so, You're trying to both set up a coherent narrative with the beginning, middle, and end, but you're trying to give surprise moments of different emotional tones or feelings to the work.
So how is this work adding something new that the previous five pieces you looked at may or may not have done so far? What would be lost if it was removed? I find that really helpful to think about if I Right. It's easy to think about, I love this piece, so I want to include it. What is it adding? And what do I lose if I remove it? I think are really clarifying. If I were asked why a piece is in here, would I want to defend it? If someone puts you on the spot, do you feel strongly enough that you would want to defend or argue? For it. If you're kind of a shrug, well, no, then maybe it's not as strong as you think it is, or it's not doing the amount of labor in your portfolio as you think it is. If its inclusion shows range, does it risk fragmenting my voice? There's a real desire to show the breadth of what we can do. And that There's range, but at the same time, we want to speak in chorus, right? We want this unified voice. And you're showing too many different types of work and too many different types of mediums, which we'll come back to later in this. There's a real risk of looking incoherent and for the reviewer to get confused about what is the core essence of your work. Artistic practice, which is why finding those core principles to anchor on is so key. If you answer any of these questions in a particular way, if it doesn't feel strong, it doesn't add something new, Remove it. It's a very simple equation. So the final portfolio size often And again, you want to look at the specific needs of what you're applying to. Is 10 to 20 total images? Typical range for that's the typical range for a complete portfolio submission that may not mean 10 to 20 projects, right? 10 to 20 works. You may have 8 to 15 works since some works may require having multiple angles to show the full breadth of what that work is, right? Do you need an installation shot to show that a sculpture is a certain size? It's very different when you think it's only, you know, If you think it's 12 inches tall, it turns out to be 5 inches tall. That is a different vibe. Overall, quality matters here more than quantity. And later, Because again, You are tailoring your portfolio to the ask. Every time to the situation.
So you're going to be continually revising it for new contexts. You really want to stick with the idea of replacing and not adding. And that's a really strong rule to live by. Replacing images because they do something that your current portfolio does not yet do. They add something new. But you want to replace and not add because if you keep adding onto it suddenly you're well beyond your 10 to 20 images.
So you want to sequence like an exhibition. You're in essence telling a story and sequence shapes that interpretation. And you want to order that sequence for maximum clarity. Again, busy people looking at this who are trying to just make sense of it as quickly as they can.
So think in terms of pacing. Think of sequencing. As an act of pacing it out.
Like a good exhibition, it should have a ebb and flow within your portfolio. You want to vary the rhythm to maintain basically maximum engagement.
So sequencing is not only an aesthetic thing. Sequencing is meaning making. And if you think about what it's like to walk around an exhibition, right, curators often As they think about pacing, right, they put in contrasts. They create moments of breathing room in a show. They start strong. They explore some interesting things in the middle that are related and then they make sure that they close strong as well.
So in that vein, following the lead of so many curators who've Hopefully we've all seen really great exhibitions that we can think about what does it mean to pace a show. You want to start by placing your strongest work first. Your first work should represent your practice clearly. No questions. This is what I'm about as an artist and this is the type of work I'm making right now. You want it to be visually compelling, and you want to establish confidence in the person viewing your portfolio. There's nothing worse than opening a portfolio and the first thing thinking like, I'm disappointed.
Like, you want to start with your strongest work first, not have to overcome someone's first reaction if the first work isn't quite as strong. Because most people don't realize that decisions are made unconsciously in the first one to three images as people are flipping through your portfolio. It happens so fast. And the opening work is disproportionately important. I think it's really useful as artists to think about what that first work is in your portfolio because it forces us to know what we're about at our core as an artist. Ciao. Overall, avoid warming up slowly in most cases. And again, all of these are guidelines.
Like every rule can be broken. We're artists we know that but it's good to start strong so someone is excited to continue I think it's worth saying here that when a reviewer is open portfolio or an art critic writes about a show and People don't come to work rooting for it to be disappointing, right? We value our time as people and we want people generally to succeed. And they open, in my experience, having... I've known a lot of reviewers in my time. They open each portfolio wanting it to be the one.
Like just the thing that just like makes their day. Like they are rooting for you just as we root for you in our cohort feedback sessions.
So start out on your strongest foot forward first. And help them feel that way right from the get-go.
So creating visual and conceptual rhythm in that sense of pacing, So I'm back. Contrast to think about, right? You can alternate between dense and simpler works. In terms of composition. Between dark and light. Between large and small or between quiet complex. The reason we want to vary and alternate the rhythm is that if works start to blur together, then the viewer is going to lose interest. There is a balancing act here between your work being coherent, and all of your work being kind of same-sie. And blurring together.
So avoiding redundancy. If two works do the same thing, include only the stronger one. The HP should add something new to the sequence. And end with a strong closing work. Your final work should feel significant memorable. It should suggest a direction for where your work might be heading next. You don't want to end with a whimper. You want to inspire people that this is someone I want to be in my program or in this exhibition. And so as you're choosing your closing work, you want to remember your goal. What is your purpose in applying to this? And play to that, right? Are you trying to create a sense of curiosity? Are you trying to get a strong hell yes, like I want this person in? And anchor the works that you choose here at the end to that goal. Right, you're choosing a final image that helps your particular audience make the decision you want them to make. All right, so in terms of sequencing, There are so many different ways to go about this and no portfolio is the same. I'm going to give a couple of guidelines here, structurally, for how to think about this. But the two biggest kind of fork in the road of how you sequence depends on, in part, on how you make work. Are you a project-based artist where the project is the container for a bunch of different works. Or are you a piece-based artist where work belongs to specific periods?
Like, I made a series of paintings. I made them over two years. They weren't a project. They don't have a container, but they're all definitely connected because I was working with the shade of blue when I was doing it. As opposed to a project-based artist who says, "I'm going to create this generative system and it's going to create 100 pieces. And I'm going to spend six months coding it, And then all the pieces are created at the end of the process. The project is the container for all of those different works.
So, depending on which way you're working, or have been working, or more specifically have been working recently, because that's the type of work you're putting into your portfolio, chooses how you might structure this. So option A. Grouping by project and year. Right here, we might group by project A, then go into project B, then finish with project C. Groupings prioritize clarity and easy comprehension. It allows each body of work to establish its internal logic before introducing another. And it can be good to let me go back to full screen.
So it can be good to... Group... By project and year when the projects are meaningfully different from one another. The projects require immersion to understand. I need to see them in relation to one another. To make sense of them. Changing projects, represents clear transition points in your practice You've changed mediums or you've changed styles but you're still interrogating the same questions. Seeing a question carried between projects can be really compelling to a curator or reviewer. Or you're earlier in your career.
Like simply put, your bodies of work are best seen in these chunks. And that's Project can stand in just for the word chunk here, right, a grouping into a chunk.
So you're applying you're just applying to formal context. So people, admissions, residencies, galleries generally prefer portfolios that are easy to parse and grouping works together reduces kind of the cognitive friction of what am I looking at? Why am I looking at it now? How does this fit in to this practice?
So this can be useful when a practice is still consolidating and clarity is more important than complexity. So I love grouping. Grouping is a fantastic way to organize a portfolio. It reads really cleanly. Again, for busy reviewers, it makes a lot of sense quickly. And it's easy to see when you've transitioned in what you're doing as an artist. The other option, is weaving between images and time periods.
So again, thinking of painters and sculptors or photographers. Right, you might show a work from 2026, then the next image might be from 2026, but then the image after that might be from 2023, followed by one from 24, and then you go even earlier, 22, 21, 22 again, and so on. Right, the structure here of weaving between images and time periods prioritizes connections. It allows the viewer to see the relationships you want to draw between bodies of work. And it's good to use weaving as a method between images and time periods when the project shares the same goals and questions. Even if materials differ, the underlying investigation remains stable. And weaving can reveal the continuity across your practice. Two, The pieces are conceptually interdependent. The meaning here emerges through juxtaposition. The viewer understands each project more fully when they see it alongside the other pieces. Three, you want to emphasize the integrated nature of your practice. While grouping projects emphasizes sequence, weaving suggests that multiple years worth of work coexist kind of simultaneously. This can communicate a more mature and integrated practice to a reviewer. It's worth saying here that generally you need a lot of work to be able to do this well. And that means generally you're further along in your practice for weaving to be successful. Four. The visual dialogue between works strengthens each.
So some works activate each other. Placing them next to each other allows the viewer to see connections that would otherwise remain invisible if grouped by project or year. And five, your practice is highly cohesive even across mediums.
So when the work clearly belongs together, weaving them reinforces their unity. That you're telling one story, that you have one core as an artist, and that's what you're trying to communicate.
So. Early career artists should generally favor grouping by project and year, grouping into chunks, Whereas more established artists can, and that's a can, not should, can use weaving to communicate cohesion and depth. Weaving is more prone to failure. And it's why I encourage doing it more project-based and grouping into chunks by project in your Weaving is structurally more demanding. You're adding complexity. Which assumes first that the work can sustain that complexity. It requires consistency across your practice, which comes from working for a long time. And if the relationship between projects isn't immediately clear, Your portfolio is going to feel chaotic. That's the last thing we want, right? Because then you risk confusing reviewers, which makes your application an easy no, which is the exact opposite of the response we want. We don't want to confuse. We don't want to create chaos. We don't want it to feel chaotic.
So in contrast, grouping by project or year is less likely to produce confusion. Groupings risks are different, right? It can make your art practice feel compartmentalized. If you don't have clear connections between your bodies of work.
So a simple test, ask yourself, Does this work need to stand on its own to be understood? If yes, then group by project and year. Or if you ask, Does this work become clearer when seen in close connection with one another? And if the answer to that is yes, then weaving images and time periods may be more appropriate. And I'll say here, Like a hybrid approach exists, right? You can begin with clean groupings by project or period to establish each body of work clearly.
And then toward the end of your portfolio, you can weave selectively between them. This can allow the portfolio to move from clarity easily understood towards integration. And really showing the interconnection between your work. And that approach, that hybrid approach, the viewer can understand the components first and then understand their relationships. This is generally more appropriate when you're designing a PDF where you can put multiple images on a single page to show connections, to do a summary at the end, It's less applicable when you're asked to upload 20 JPEGs where each one gets a title and a date.
So again, context here matters in the way that you're thinking about how to approach this. But these are kind of two structural you know, polls within which you can operate and think about how to organize what goes in your portfolio. The first time I ever showed a portfolio, I was applying to the International Center of Photography known as ICP, here in New York. It was founded by the brother of Robert Capa. If you've ever seen the famous black and white blurry photos of the D-Day Normandy Beach landing, like that's Robert Capa. Running on the beach with the soldiers.
So his brother Cornell Kappa helped found ICT here in New York. I was applying with a portfolio, my first portfolio ever. I was very young at the time. And the reviewer Pride's home. Pardon? Be nice. And it did not go well because I had thrown in too many random things.
Like I had some portraits, I had some landscapes, I had A really good baby picture I took. Her question immediately was like, is that your baby?
Like, which is Okay, an immature artist would maybe put in, you know, family pictures mixed into their portfolio. And I'm going to put portfolio in air quotes here. So, I learned very quickly that I needed to group my work to make it make sense and not show my range. And for me, especially at that early stage, I was very much like grouping by project. Rather than grouping, rather than trying to weave things together, which is what I tried that first time. I tried to weave and show connections, and those connections were visual and aesthetic, They were not core principles of my art practice. I had no core principles yet.
So weaving was definitely the wrong approach at the time. Lesson learned very much in real time on my feet. And my hope in this program and you being here is that you can learn here now so you make less mistakes out in the wild or you get to make more advanced mistakes but we can establish some baseline facts here.
So. Once you've chosen one of these two large structural components, what should guide the order you put the images and projects within them.
So one gut reaction is the sequence chronologically. It's kind of the default a lot of people go to. Chronological order is useful primarily if growth is the point of your application.
Like, do I want to demonstrate that I have changed over time, that I'm going to start early and I'm going to finish late? There are times when that can be really useful for an application. Again, it depends on context. I much prefer starting with the strongest work. And jumping around in time as relevant. A second method for sequencing here within these two larger houses of project versus weaving. Inquiry and expansion. Present one body of work as the foundation and the next as its expansion.
So you have a project A and a project B, and you can see how one blossomed into the second. Hopefully, though, the first project you show, the foundation project, of that inquiry is not the weaker of the two projects. All right. What they're interested in is you had an idea as an artist. And I think it's very funny. The other day we heard Kevin McCoy say we basically only had one or two ideas as an artist, you know talking about their 30-year career as artists and So you want to show that the idea has evolved over time and expanded in some way. A third method is to think thematically and conceptually to show how an idea evolves across multiple projects Four is material connections, right? Connecting your practice together through questions each medium unlocks for you. A fifth way to go about this is a narrative frame, right? You're telling a story perhaps in four acts. Where you hook them early, you deepen on what you hook them on, and then you pivot at some point. Which creates tension.
And then you come to the climax and a resolution at the end. And a sixth way to think about this is anchors and satellites, right? Open with a central work, a key part of your practice that really illuminates who you are as an artist, and then present a constellation of supporting works. That branch off of that in various ways. There are so many ways to sequence. There is no one right way. I do find the grouping and weaving is like the biggest question. The second being, am I working chronologically or am I working thematically, conceptually? But maybe one of these other words, material or narrative frame or anchors and satellites can unlock something for you. These are meant to be sources of inspiration and guideposts more than strict rules or how-to's.
So take the words that matter here and resonate with you and run with that. When did two mediums belong in the same portfolio?
I mean, this is probably the question I hear most often. Right, your portfolio should not feel like, for instance, painting plus sculpture. Right. Your work should be seen as one practice unfolding across different forms.
So the time to include two mediums is when they feel like different manifestations of the same inquiry. The medium shifts, but the investigation itself remains stable.
So, for instance, an artist making paintings about fragmented architectural space as well as sculptures with fragmented architectural forms, is clearly engaged in the same set of questions, even though the medium changes. I is not difficult for a reviewer to look at that and say this belongs to the same artist What you don't want to end up is someone looks at your portfolio and says, Is this three different artists?
Like that would be confusing and the thing to avoid here. The exception to this is when you're applying to a medium-specific residency. Then you want to lead with the most relevant medium.
So it's a painting resins that you're applying with paintings. Do you do sculpture? It may not matter here. You may want to consider leaving that out. Again, it's useful to look at who the past people are who participated in residencies. You can do research not just on your audience, who you're applying to. You can do research on who has been there before, who has participated, who's received this opportunity, who's shown at this gallery, been accepted to this residency, received this grant, gotten this public installation commission. Looking at their practice can tell you the types of artists that they're interested in where those artists are at in their career and If they're consistently mid-career or late-career artists, Maybe it's worth saving your energy and putting it into a different application somewhere else. But the same question goes for Medium. Now, are they interested in artists working across mediums, or do they really want artists who are honed in on one? That doesn't mean you're not doing two or three mediums. It just means what you're putting in your portfolio. Is influenced by that here.
So the format is where we've talked core principles, we've talked gathering, editing, sequencing. We've talked about how to structure it both conceptually as well as by either grouping or weaving between pieces. Now the brass tacks part, right, format. Eventually, you should have a PDF for sending and applying, and a simple website for browsing. Both are necessary. And The differences between these are PDFs allow you to control the sequence to tailor to specific opportunities and send it directly. They're an easy thing to attach. I'm kind of throwing in their JPEGs as a export of here's 20 images that I need to upload those because that's how some sites prefer to work be submitted. Websites allow viewers to browse freely based on their interests and explore your work with a sense of discovery.
So. Many applications you'll fill out still rely on PDFs as the standard condensed and curated form for review. And website portfolios help with discovery. And with credibility, honestly. PDFs win for controlled sequencing and easy forwarding, but if I go looking for an artist's work and they don't have a website, they lose some credibility as well. Websites prove legitimacy and seriousness which is wild because anybody can make one. And we know that in the era of fake news, but it's, Again, an easy hack as an artist to help legitimize your practice and to demonstrate to people that you are serious about what you're doing. My websites can contain more. Than a portfolio that belongs in PDF or your 15 to 20 JPEGs. But And this is really important and this will require a shift, I think, in thinking for some people. This certainly did for me. Websites should primarily be a tool for persuasion. They shouldn't be an archive either in some ways. Not as their primary goal.
So. If you've ever visited an artist's website and the first thing you see when you click on the Works tab It's like, 30. Text lines of here's all the titles of the project and here's all the years that they were made and there's no images and there's no explanation, right? It is a feeling of overwhelm. Where do I start? I want to start with the artist's best work.
Like I'm, again, probably new to their practice. So the first thing I want to do is you tell me what are the three to six most important works that you've made over the last, you know, 10 plus years of your career. Just highlight those, like top line item, That is what a portfolio does. A portfolio says, here is the best work that is most relevant right now in my practice that really communicates who I am. I think realizing that you design your website Just like your PDF or JPEG portfolio, as a portfolio with a goal of appealing to the types of audiences in the art world that you want to appeal to. Again, we had that huge list earlier, right, of various stakeholders, right? Are they museum people? Are they gallery people? Are they collectors? Are they nonprofits? And are they reviewers who might follow a link from the PDF I sent them? All those people landing on your site, you don't want to overwhelm them. And in that way, the primary goal of your website is for those people to come learn a little bit more and establish a baseline, a foundation of who you are before you ask them to go deeper with your work.
So in that way, I would strongly recommend when you think about your website, and we'll talk more about websites in the months to come. As a baseline right now to think about it. Highlighting selected works first as the first thing someone's going to see and then showing somewhere a text link hidden somewhere at the bottom of a page for someone who wants to go deeper, who has already gone through the best of the selected works. And those can be different things. Your selected works are what is important right now, They're not the best of absolute hits, just like your portfolio is not the best of absolute hits of your entire career as an artist. They're simply what do I want to demonstrate that I'm focused on and exploring right now.
So I like the selected works phrase much better. But at the bottom of that selected works page, you can have a check out the rest of my archive link. And it can be small and it can be in text and it can be for a person who got to the bottom of the page.
And then you can send them to here's my 30 projects. Do you want to go deeper? We can go deeper. You can do that together. The website primarily should start out as a place for people who are following it from your applications and need simply to learn the basic facts of who you are and what you're about and the type of work you make.
So again, confusion. And feeling a little chaotic is going to get people to log off and move on to another website pretty quickly.
So, Within this, It's helpful to think about design basics. Right. We want consistent formatting across the document or the site. We want clear labeling. Readable type, generally one image per page when we're talking about PDFs. And a manageable file size. The other day I exported one of these slideshows and it was 75 megabytes as a PDF and I dropped it into Adobe Acrobat, the PDF editor and viewer, and there was a reduced size option under the file menu and suddenly it was 3 megabytes in size and I mean, I toggled back and forth between both versions, looked exactly the same, could not find a visual difference.
So as you start adding images, think about trying out a tool like Acrobat or other file shrinking tools for PDFs. Keep it manageable, something someone can easily attach to an email and be like my goodness, I just got this amazing application. You got to check out this artist. You want to be in that boat and not make it hard for people. Things to avoid. Too many decorative graphics. I think we've all, again, this comes down to taste. Right. We are artists, not all of us have a design skill or background.
So simple can be better in this case. Your mileage may vary. Super complex layouts as well.
Like again, think about what is a gallery presentation of an exhibition look like? It is image. , ".
So the work really should be the focus here. And if the design is detracting from that, that's where we run into trouble.
Someone was asking the other day about portfolio design software. I mean, Adobe InDesign is still the standard for a lot of people. It's generally used in the publishing world, but it gives incredible control over layout. If you're a photographer, Adobe Lightroom has modules for being able to export your images as PDFs and do layout with titles and captions. Affinity Publisher, I hear a lot of really good things from people about as Figma as well. Figma is used for many different types of design, a lot for software, designers love it a lot. Canva is probably the easiest entry point for a lot of people if you can find a good template you like. I find sometimes their tools are actually a little more cumbersome to use than something like InDesign or even Photoshop or Illustrator. But honestly, I love PowerPoint. I do a lot of work in PowerPoint. I know some artists who make their art in PowerPoint doing vector shapes and It's just a really clean, easy layout tool. And whether that's PowerPoint or Keynote or Google Slides, they all kind of do the same thing in different ways. You just want to make sure that whichever tool you use when you do layout, and I'm thinking of Google Slides here in particular as an online tool, when you I've had experience where I've exported a PDF and it does not look the same as it looked when showing the live version in Google Slides.
So just do an early test. Like make a couple pages, export it to a PDF, make sure it looks the way you expect it to. And practice doing that. File naming really matters here, like really. And this came up a little bit this week as people were starting to share work for feedback. Right. Reviewers want to make sure that they can tell who the work is from, what order it should be viewed in, and what this PDF is for or applies to. And the priority goes in that order.
So, Some applications will require you to upload individual images. If you've put in all the time to sequence your work in a compelling way, You want to be consistent in your file naming so images don't accidentally get out of order.
So. Right, some file naming conventions here might be always start with your name, perhaps include the word portfolio If you're uploading images as JPEGs, number them 01, 02, 03. I don't see it very often anymore, but it used to be that old computer systems like number 1 and number 10 would end up side by side in some ordering.
So really good to put that zero in front. Perhaps include the title of the projects or individual pieces and the year, especially if you're uploading jpegs instead of a PDF, and consider including the name of the opportunity.
So some examples here. Write your name, underscore portfolio underscore 01, 02, 03. Really clean. We know that this came from Haver, it's Haver's portfolio. Or you can include the title and year of the work on the end of that.
So Haver Portfolio 01 in the ways of being 2023. And Portfolio02 and the next name of the work. Or you can include the Opportunity Start Behavior Portfolio St. John's College Residency 01.
Honestly, that will make some reviewers feel like you really tailored this to them. This isn't just a random application that you sent out and threw together in an evening. You put some thought into what images you wanted to send to them specifically.
So including the opportunity name can be really useful. I often think that if you do include the opportunity name, though, you can't include the title of the work. It makes it a little long to include the name on top of that, depending on what the opportunity is called. The thing to avoid, and this is something actually that came up this week in our cohort feedback sessions, is you want to title in a way that when somebody alphabetizes it doesn't accidentally end up out of order.
So if you put the title of the work before the number, before the 01, Right, look at this example, right? "In the ways of being" starts with an "I", the title of the next body of work starting with number four and five, always on, when I hit alphabetize, Numbers 4 and 5 are going to end up first. My portfolio that I spent so much time sequencing and putting in a really lovely order is going to end up out of order.
So make sure you test sorting by A to Z to A, sorting by time created as well when you're looking at your files to make sure that they're always going to be in the order that you intended. Again, because you put the work into it and it matters.
So within your PDF, If you're making a PDF version, every work needs a caption. Sites that require you to upload a JPEG often have fields where you can put in title, year, medium, and dimensions. Otherwise, put it as a little caption in the corner next to the work, but let the work speak for itself. Let that be the big thing. You don't need a lot of extra text there. To explain the work. This is basically just standard professional format. Having this makes a reviewer's job easier, It signals seriousness. The most important thing is just to keep it consistent. Right. Don't force viewers to hunt for basic facts. If you always put it in a certain section of the page, keep it over there in the same spot.
So this is again just-- basic design ideas that make it easy for people to find the information they need. Use a consistent captioning format in that sense. Here is a classic one which has the title. The year, the medium that it's in, and the dimensions. Titles are really important to have with your work. They help identify the work. They can help make meaning. Titles can be descriptive. They can be an abstract idea. They can just be called untitled all of those are acceptable. The thing to avoid is leaving works completely unnamed. For those that didn't come through an art history or art school practice, the reason a lot of works end up being called untitled, and I just think this is really interesting, is that in the middle of the 20th century, abstract painters didn't want to encourage any particular interpretation of their work. They didn't want them to become figurative. Be perceived as having figures or characters in them.
So they would just name them "untitled." It was a conceptual choice. And specific to that time period, artists still do it today because we've inherited so much from that generation. It doesn't mean it's the only way. I actually really love the title seemed to have come back into vogue for a lot of artists. It's just like one more piece to play with. Which can be exciting and fun. Dimensions help the viewer understand scale, right? Always include the height first. Then the web Then the depth, if applicable. A medium should be specific.
So instead of mixed media, Use things like oil, acrylic, and graphite on canvas. List all of the materials. The... The goal here is to be precise. If you're not precise, Again, you leave people with a lot of questions. In the age of AI, you leave people with the opportunity of thinking, was this made with AI? I don't know. It looks messed up over here. That can be really intentional. And naming the materials you use helps free people from questions once again. Keep writing in the portfolio to a minimum. Captions in your portfolio should identify, they should not be explaining the works or how they function. Long explanations belong elsewhere in what you're submitting. Last few ideas here, and then we'll open up for some questions.
So You want to have strong documentation. Right. Documentation here meaning photographs, generally speaking, but exported files, scans, however you're putting your work into your portfolio. The worst thing that could happen is your documentation sabotages the work. If you don't have strong documentation, then sabotaging the work is exactly what will happen. You want to prioritize clarity above all else. Your photographic or scanned documentation should be sharp, evenly lit properly exposed. Color accurate, right? Nothing worse than looking at a picture and then seeing the original in person and saying, that's not the same thing. Right, that blue is aqua in the photo. That's a problem. The images should be undistorted as well. You want to avoid blurry images, dramatic shadows, heavy color casts like when it's way too yellow or way too blue, which can happen in a gallery depending on the lighting that's in there. Tilted shots or skewed framing, which just make it seem like you rushed and weren't careful in what you were doing. All of this is doing unconscious work signaling to a reviewer that you take your work seriously. You took the time to document it, so that's important.
Some photography basics. For 2D work, the camera should be parallel to the surface so it's not They call it keystoning, like when you take a photo of a really tall building and it seems to shrink as it goes taller.
So having it parallel means it's going to be nice and square. There's no angle distortion. And you cropped it cleanly. You want to avoid any kind of perspective distortion like that or photographing from above like you put the work on the ground and you photograph it from above, you're probably going to create a shadow doing that. You want to show only what helps the viewer understand the work.
So this could be a full view. This could be a detail view if needed. Or an installation view if that's relevant. But the goal here is to not be repetitive. I remember this from very early, like an hour ago when we first started talking. You want to vary the rhythm of what you're showing. And types of shots can be a way to do that.
So the focus should be the work alone. Remove all distractions, avoid showing studio clutter, wall damage, uneven backgrounds, objects that are not part of the work. Again, the rule is no distractions. The portfolio image should privilege the work. And maintain consistency across all the images so that your portfolio feels unified.
So consistent framing, consistent color cast, consistent lighting. The role of detail and installation shots. So. Installation shots can be really useful. They can prove the scale of the work. They can prove your spatial intelligence and how you position it within a space. They can demonstrate your exhibition readiness.
Like someone who's shown before, I can press them to succeed at showing again. This is especially important for sculpture, installation work, interdisciplinary work, and large-scale work. A major blind spot for artists working in physical media is only including isolated object shots. An installation image answers a question the isolated image can't. What is it like to be in the presence of this work? Installation shots show the work not as an image, but as an encounter. And this distinction is crucial because most exhibition decisions are based on how the work will function in space. Shifting the work from object to experience can help make a reviewer's decision easier. And again, we want it to be an easy yes for them.
So when to include installation shots. It's good when it occupies or activates a space. Here's the work doing that. When it chose the word changing the environment that it's in, or it will affect a viewer's perception. Insulation shots though can distract from the work itself, right, if the work is too small within the photograph. It can make the work harder to see. And it can introduce visual clutter. Right, installation shots. Again, we don't want to see damaged walls in the gallery where they haven't been repatched yet. We don't want to see clutter in the studio. The goal here is that the installation chart should clarify and not obscure. Detail shots They prove formal precision. Perceptual depth, material intelligence, These are especially important for painting and drawing, sculpture, textile, mixed media. Right. If a full view establishes the work's overall structure, A detail shot reveals how the work is built. And a detail shot. Basically here means just a closer shot, right?
Something focusing on the details of the work, tighter in. It allows the viewer to move from the level of composition to the level of the artist's decisions moment by moment in their studio.
So from across the room, a painting may appear resolved. But. Up close, the viewer sees how the paint is handled, how edges are negotiated. How surfaces can accumulate material. And how forms can transition.
Right? This is where artistic judgment becomes visible. There's a big difference between composition and seeing the details of a work. We're giving the feeling of being able to stand back in a gallery and then approach the work.
So, Detail shots might include the brushwork, the layering, the edge conditions, the surface texture, joins and seams, transitions between materials. Again, the operative question is when I choose to include this image in my sequence, and again you only have 10 to 20 images to choose from, You're asking, what is including this image add? And these are some of the things that it can reveal about a particular key work that you want to emphasize by spending more time on it.
So a typical structure might include the full view, the overall composition showing the complete assembly, detail view, close up precision of critical features, and an installation view. It's spatial context and placement within the room. Each contributes different information to the whole. And together they produce a complete understanding of the artwork and the artist's intentions and choices. And it worked.
So within the portfolio, right, the images are just one piece of it. That's where we've lingered today. It felt really important to do this at this particular moment because we just spent the last three weeks doing artist presentations. People went back into their archive, they pulled out lots of work in a lot of cases.
So what is in your archive is really fresh in your mind. And so I wanted to highlight the portfolio PDF of images as something to start working on now. As we move further into the program, we're going to work on the other pieces of this. The artist statement, the artist bio, the CV. Always making sure that there's contact information.
Like, you put all the work applying, like, make sure they can find you. So we'll work on those other more written materials later in the coming months. But right now, while your archive is still fresh, I want to give you the exercise and the challenge to take the work that you started with in the last three, four weeks as you put together your presentations. And think about how to put it together into a portfolio. How to pare it down into the essentials of your recent practice, Figure out what it means to take all the images you've gathered, because you've already done that work, and to edit and sequence them. And see if that can help reveal what the core principles are at the center of your practice.
So strong portfolios sometimes break conventions. We're artists, so we love to break rules.
So it's worth saying you can open with a quiet work. You can include unconventional documentation and you can use unusual sequencing. All of these are options. Don't feel hemmed in by this or that you need to abide by everything or even anything I say. I would only go against those conventions when doing something like opening with a quiet work or an unusual sequencing method strengthens understanding of your work. The goal is not to demonstrate our oddity as artists and how we stand out in the world. Our goal is to be understood and to communicate clearly what we're making and what we're about as artists. To make us an easy yes to this opportunity. And again, to tailor each opportunity, each portfolio to the opportunity.
So that means maintaining your portfolio. And I'll close here. And if you have questions, I know some have been popping up in the chat already. Feel free to drop more in, and I will jump to those in just a moment. When you maintain your portfolio, you want to review and update it regularly. You want to replace weak work a stronger work emerges in your practice. And always think not about adding work, but replacing work that you've put in previously. Most strong portfolios are revised constantly. They are matched to the situation to the audience and the purpose of to which you're applying.
So that's our Presentation for today. That gives you a good starting place in terms of your an exercise. And things to tackle in your practice, I'm really excited to see what you guys start to make. And those are things that we can look at together as we start scheduling our one-on-one sessions with your mentor. Let me turn now to questions from the chat, which I'm really excited. I saw some good chat happening. All right. Rafa asked, "Is it okay to include collaborations?" Absolutely.
Yeah, I think as long as it's clear that it's a collaboration, If you feel like it's your strongest work and that is key to your practice then that can be really good to do. Jonathan was asking about productivity tools. And designing his portfolio in HTML and CSS.
And then making it printable to a PDF. Absolutely. Whatever is easiest here to make the design. If you're really fast and smooth working in code, to do layout, then fantastic. It can be very easy to sub in images and text that way. Again, I think the goal here is to pick a tool that you're comfortable with and to have it as a container, right, in which I know that this text field can be edited and this image can be replaced on the regular and I can swap things out and it's easy to, for me, I like having the ability to click and drag and move things around because I need to quickly test out what it feels like to see one thing side by side with another. In that sense, it can be really useful to experience this as both thumbnails and as individual images, right? To put it full screen and flip through it because reviewers are going to do it both ways, right? If you're working on a Mac, you double click on a PDF. In your downloads folder, it opens in preview, right? The built-in OS app. And oftentimes you'll have thumbnails over on the left and the image over on the right. That can be one way of viewing it. Another way is the quick view in which you press space bar while you're you know, on a PDF and it kind of does a little pop-up screen version of it. Experience it both ways. See what it feels like to move through it. My wife, who does a lot of writing, says that when she is at the stage where she has, you know, written and edited and she is starting, it's all starting to blur together. It can be really useful for her to change the font of what she's written. Literally just changing the font from Times New Roman to Arial. And suddenly it feels like it was written by a different person and you can see it fresh. We have to find as visual makers strategies for doing that.
So I like jumping between the spacebar method of opening it, the double click to open it in preview, watching it full screen, And Let's see. Lots of suggestions to Jonathan. Is there any way to include video?
Yeah, so the best way to do that is probably to put some stills in the PDF. And then to have a live link to make sure that when you save it, links don't get crushed out and flattened to be not links and know that those links are going to be consistent over time. I think having the link there is helpful, making sure that it is a URL that makes sense.
I mean, I'm very nervous as a reviewer of work to click on any link that's been shortened. So I would avoid putting shortened links in. But QR codes can be helpful in this case because you can still see the URL when you know, put your phone over it.
So if it points to vimeo.com, and that's what I'm going to see, not all the letters and numbers that come after that. I will follow through after I've scanned the QR code of clicking on it. I see a question here about using GitHub repository for your portfolio website.
I mean, I have to be honest. I have tried to learn GitHub and I get lost every time. I've even taken like an hour long class and I'm just like, it's not for me. It's not for this phase of my life. My versioning is I save a new version in a new folder and I open the new folder and it's all local. I've tried and I feel like I'm pretty smart with tech.
So I would just recognize that most people who don't know tech and therefore are unlikely to figure it out or get lost. I would focus on a website at a dot-com first. Jesse had a question. Can I combine painting and pencil works in my portfolio to tell my stories, as long as they all stay on identity and culture? Or must one stick to one medium for easy identification?
So the goal here, I think, is to make sure that it feels unified within your practice. I think having those two mediums can create a sense of rhythm, which is really useful, but you want to make sure that the Pencil works are as detailed as the paintings and vice versa. One doesn't feel like it's stronger. Than the other. Because again, the question primarily is, what is your strongest work here? And how does it explain what you're about as an artist?
So if you're feeling those are unified in what you're exploring, great. I know from looking at your portfolio during the, the presentation, in which we kind of went through the archive, there are many different styles and themes explored.
So figuring out how to trim that down and get it really focused on the key conceptual or thematic things, I think is more important than trimming out mediums at this stage. And then James had a question. I just did this whole exercise a month ago and got a lot of good ideas for improvements.
And then share the portfolio. I definitely feel like I needed to do a lot of explaining just to build context around the work because I was approaching a contemporary art gallery with this.
Yeah, so being able to have additional documents next to the portfolio, the artist statement, I think is really key for being able to explain yourself. All right.
Well, that's our time for today. This was a lot of fun to put together for you all. Fumbled my way through learning these things over the last 25 years, working in and adjacent to the arts in various capacities and realizing that there is no one answer. And that you don't have to throw out a medium is really important. You can have more than one. I'm excited for you all as you do this exercise over the next five weeks of what remains of our first quarter to figure out what your core principles are as an artist.
So I'll put the slides up as I always do with the session replay. Download that. There are a couple slides in there that talk about figuring out core principles. And I look forward to seeing what you guys make there and discussing it when we sit down for our one-on-ones. All right, have a good rest of your day all.