Haiver | 00:00
Hey, everyone. Really glad to have you here with us today. I'm excited to be back here with Dr. Paulina Rude. This is very important. Last name pronounced rude, which is good for us to all. Since we have so many people in our community from around the world, Make sure that we're practicing good pronunciation of all of our names. Mine, once again, is pronounced "haver" as if the I were silent. Tricks people often. It's a Scottish family name and We have people still trickling in here.
So we'll give it just another minute before we Get cracking. Okay, so today is our first art history lecture. I'm really excited about this. We, like I mentioned the other day, interviewed or had submissions from 70 people to find who we were going to work with So I'm really excited that I ended up being Dr. Rude Polina and I think it's important for us here at the beginning of this session to frame our goals. Why are we doing what we're doing in this part of the program?
So a third of this program is about putting you in close contact with working artists with decades of experience in the art world. And to see, I think, what is the roadmap of their career. To not just think about the old masters we see in museums, but to think about what it means to make art in the 21st century. And to build what we're doing into that lineage. All of us here would most likely like to have museum shows at some point and to see ourselves written about in art history books.
Someday as important artists of this time. And if that's what we want, then we're entering into a world, an art world, that has certain norms and expectations for how we behave, for how we talk and write about our work.
So if you don't care about exhibitions and how curators or historians will write about you in the decades to come, then you can choose to work outside the system. And the result of that is you won't get those things. But I think we're all If we're being honest, almost all of us want exhibitions. We want curators to care about what we're doing. We want collectors to care. We want to end up in art history books someday. And so if those are the things we want, that has to change the way we move through our relationship to our art and the art world at large. And Artist Commons is really a program that's designed to help both strengthen your work and help you learn how to make and present it in a way that will resonate with the larger art world.
So this program is to help make that art world more legible to you. And to make your work and you as an artist legible to them. This is in some ways about figuring out how to communicate with one another.
So all the lectures and panels we have throughout this year on the business of art will only be useful to you if you're working in a way that the art world can make sense of, if you're legible to them. So a third of this program, like I said, includes hearing from contemporary artists.
And then contextualizing their work within art history. None of the artists that we're having come in are working ahistorically, right? They are working within a lineage of art history. And building on the shoulders of giants.
So when we have the art visiting artists come in this month, in the coming months, we have them come in for a five week cycle in which they do three sessions, a presentation a craft workshop on some part of their practice. And we have them do a candid interview at the end where any questions that we've been building up over that five weeks together, we're able to start answering. Whatever hasn't been answered yet. And That is going to explain to us one artist's way of moving through the art world and kind of paint a roadmap what it means to build a long-term career in the arts. But it doesn't necessarily give us the context in which they're working, right? The artist is going to come and talk about their own particular work and practice.
So what Dr. Rood is here to do today and in the coming weeks is to help us contextualize, to make sense of why these artists are making the way they're making, what is the social and political impact. Elements of the culture in which they're responding to So. I'm really excited for that because our first couple artists are working with technology in various ways.
That's why this first lecture is about machines learning to see, and next week is about systems and narrative I thought it was important for us as a program to start with these artists working with technology. Why? Technology governs our lives. It influences our thinking and how we spend our days. And has way more control than.
And I find that their work represents some of the most exciting developments in contemporary art right now. We'll have other mediums represent the further in we get to the program.
So these include a textile artist, a painter, hopefully a photographer. We're pinning some of these down still. Obviously, emailing people over the last 10 weeks, which was Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, Christmas, New Year's. It's not a great time for getting answers from people about anything business related.
So we have a lot in motion, but we have the first few, first couple quarters here lined up really strongly. And I'm excited to share them with you.
So the other reason I think it's important for us to start here is to help us with artists who are working with technology in this strange cutting edge ways is that it helps us think about what is art. These are artists that will push us to expand our definitions and ideally help us to reconsider our own mediums and why we make work in those mediums as we continue to make work throughout this quarter and workshop it with one another in our cohorts. It'll help us to figure out, again, by engaging with these strange mediums that are not our own in a lot of cases, to figure out how these artists are injecting meaning into their work and what they're trying to say and do with their work to help us figure out how we can better say and do what we want to in our own respective mediums.
So this sense of dislocation of not just having painters come talk to painters and sculptors come talk to sculptors is a way of helping move us out of our comfort zone and therefore see our own work in new and exciting ways. So these art history lectures, and this is the last thing I'll say before I just hand it over to Dr. Rood for the rest of our 90 minutes together. These art history lectures will riff off of the themes in art history context of our visiting artists. A lot of the people in this program don't come from art school backgrounds.
So I'm excited for you to learn from her and to gather a bit more art history knowledge to help you ground your own practice. And to see over the next few weeks what it means to work not a historically but within the lineage of art history.
Like I said, building on the shoulders of giants. Because that's part of how we make ourselves and our work legible to the larger art world.
So she has a lot to cover. This is a lecture, not a seminar.
So this is mics off as most of our lectures will be. Feel free to drop your questions in the text chat. And I'll pull some out for us to discuss at the end if we have any time left. When you put questions in the text chat, because she's going to be prompting you to put other things in the text chat as well in addition to just questions. Please put a capital Q and then a colon after it.
Like the two little dots. And that will help us-- I'll be able to search. Just for those particular questions, those Q colons, and pull them out at the end.
So I can filter everything else out and just find your questions so they don't get buried. So don't worry, be worried about asking a question too early. Share them as they come and I will pull all the ones that have a Q colon in them out at the end. Otherwise, whatever we don't get to at the end, bring them into the community app and we'll keep the discussion going in the art lecture discussions channel.
So please welcome Dr. Paulina Rood.
Polina Rud | 08:37
Hey everyone, thank you Heiber for this introduction, not only of me but of the topic because today we are gonna watch really closely how technology is connected and interacts with art history in general. So before we begin I'm gonna do like a small note on how we're gonna work today. As Hegar said, that if you have questions directly connected to the slides I'm speaking about, feel free to write them in the chat. And as we go, I'll try to answer those questions immediately. But sometimes it happens that a question might be more general, conceptual, philosophical, and it may need a longer response.
So you write that in the chat, but then I will come back to that at the end of the lecture. So and from time to time I'm going to ask you questions. Obviously it's a lecture, not a seminar, but every single time I want to create this connection with you.
So maintain a kind of a dialogue and we're going to have it in our chat. So today we have a slightly tricky task We are going to trace how the mechanisms of seeing have changed across history and obviously we should forget completely about chronology and chronological order. We are going to focus on conceptual one and that's why I have intentionally stepped away from a simple historical timeline and instead each block will focus on a shift in how a vision operates, what consequences that shift produces in reality and what new problems and possibilities as well emerged from it.
So in each block, I'll show, I'll try to show all the artworks from different period side by side so that not to get confused by that because I didn't want to stay in one era but to reveal that artists across centuries have often asked similar questions and by placing these works together we can see how technology changes, how thinking how we think about these, how we envision these problems. So rather than moving forward in time, we'll move across regimes of vision and see what each one did to the world and obviously to us.
So let's start with that seeing in general is not a biological act. But we can say that every era has its own optical order, a cultural logic that defines how we see and what counts as real. And when seeing stops being only biological, what do we think? We think about Renaissance every single time, because at that time the world became calculable space. And the question is who pushed this shift? And surprisingly, it was not a scientist or it was a scientist, but an artist as well and Italian artist, obviously. Around 1420, Filippo Brunelleschi demonstrated linear perspective. It's a kind of a mathematical system in which all lines converge to a vanishing point, creating this illusion of three-dimensional space. And he painted the Florence Baptistery in perfect perspective, that right now we even, at that time, people cannot even imagine that. He drilled a peephole at the vanishing point and viewed the panel's reflection in a mirror while standing before the real building and when the mirror was removed the painting image or the painted image emerged seamlessly with the reality.
So here is the question for you. Does this experiment resemble any technologies we use today? Please text me in the chat. Is there anything that we can trace and understand, okay, this technology is emerged because of that? Any ideas?
Exactly. Yeah, you're totally right. -- 3D scanners, love that.
So yeah, obviously linear perspective, build this or trace all these technologies, like for example, great grandfather, we can say of viewfinder, the camera, even VR headset, camera, obscure, photography, everything that you're saying. I really love the answer, 3D scanner.
So linear perspective. Did even more then change art. It changed the position of the human subject. The viewer was placed at the center of vision.
So space unfolded as an object to be measured, owned, and navigated. Landscapes invited our eye right now to roam and possess. And the universe at that time became no longer a kind of a spiritual hierarchy, but it became divisible, frameable, organizable by a powerful eye.
So these This perspectival mindset shaped Govanus as much as painting. Because one land could be represented geometrically, we know what happens, right? It could be divided, taxed, sold, colonized, wherever we can imagine speaking about power.
So the view from nowhere became this view of power. And Leonardo da Vinci in 1502 created Imola maps. And unlike medieval maps centered on symbolic meaning, his maps used a strict bird eye view. And it was brilliant, but at the same time, it was pretty dangerous because Borgia, Cesar Borgia, commissioned it not to admire obviously space, but to control it.
So seeing from above became domination by design. And in one word, what do you think view from above does to empathy? How do you feel about that? Or maybe in a couple of words, what happens with us? What view from above does to our empathy? What happens? If we are being seen from above.- Minimizes it, that's interesting. Yes, and with the facts feeling surveyed. I like that because this echo of feeling surveyed or we are being controlled, it reaches how we live right now in 20th or 21st century. Heidegger said that modern humans no longer encounter things as beings. But they see them as resources. For example, forests become timber inventory, rivers become hydropower because perspective turns the world into this abstraction. And after that the mountain becomes something you can create and then mine and then exploit infinitely. And here a vision becomes a tool for capitalism.
So the majority of urban planners have been treating cities the same way as philosopher Lewis Mumford noted that modern cities were often designed from above, ignoring how people actually lived at street level. So the planners maps are this bird eye view that led to rigid redirons and tower blocks ignoring any human scale and basically it flattens our human life into very abstract figures.
So these critiques echo the notion that optical order serves power and in this case the power of centralized authorities, often at our expense, right, at the expense of people. And contemporary artists, I love that they continue to probe this inherited viewpoint, to question, to test it. As for example, Andreas Gursky adopts this elevated and impossible viewpoint of contemporary power itself. He captures stock exchanges, factories, hotels, supermarkets and vast landscapes from heights that no human body could naturally reach. And we see how he reveals this power and especially capitalistic logic, because he sees not as this capitalistic logic sees us not only individuals, people, right, but as masses, this interchangeable data points in a processed reality.
So by adopting this viewpoint, he turns it into critique. And right away right now, while I'm saying this, I remembered Warhol's insight because he said that the most effective way to disturb a system is not to resist it from outside saying that it's not correct, but to enter it and exaggerate it from within as Gorski does here.
So Renaissance maps often hid uncertainties with cartouches or sea monsters because they don't want to see us something that we shouldn't, right? So here Mark Lombardi draws to expose these connections and he is trying to show that the powerful want to be unseen and visibility can be a political weapon that we are trying to make something visible, right?
So interesting. I have this strange fear of satellite images and maps.
Yeah, later we're going to speak about that because right now, it's all about horizontal scene and that was transformed into vertical scene right how right now drones and cameras are seen and trying to see what we are doing trying to control us so yeah visibility as i mentioned as i said can be a political weapon here and lombardi's works They channel the same culture graphic impulse as Leonardo Imola maps, but with subversion because he made hand drawn diagrams of political and financial networks, how we are connected in between because he analyzed all these political structures, he analyzed some internal movements in international corporations and how it affects us. So modern philosophers and artists eventually questioned whether a single or a coherent viewpoint could ever capture reality. And obviously here we have to remember cubism because cubism fractured this perspective, showing objects from very multiple angles at once.
So where do you think these cubist experiments in vision ended up remember that we were speaking a lot about politics and social aspects so where do you think these experiments may have ended up .
That's interesting. Advertising, obviously, but there is a very precise technique or a precise industry where it was applied. There is a very strange historical echo because Cubist fragmentation later inspired dazzle camouflage in the First World War because all these patterns were designed to confuse Any misperception right so a theory of we vision one more time became a tactic of invisibility and once again and discovery about vision was appropriated by power and David Hockney speaking about other contemporary artists, he was not that. Okay, with the tyranny of single point perspective he rejected that and his photographic colleges stitch together multiple viewpoints and moments in time. And he said that no it's impossible to see like that from one perspective, our human vision works really differently.
So, David Hockney says that perspective. Is not a natural law, it is a choice. And here it's very important because sometimes artificial lands can be shifted and we may choose that. It's not like we are defined to see in this or that way and every single time we should question that.
So seeing what kind of takeaways we can have here. Seeing is never neutral. We saw that linear perspective reorganized completely the world, turning space into something very measurable, ownable, governable. And from Brunelleschi to Leonardo, vision became.
Redesigned to feed this view from above and to control us. And we spoke today that it's all about controlling us. And contemporary artists, they responded by mimicking PowerPoints, Powers viewpoints, right? To expose this logic because we remember Andy Warhol here that we have to exaggerate in order to make this subversive action inside of the system.
So I prepared different kinds of questions for you to take to your own practice. Right now I won't pose on them so we can maintain the pause and the rhythm, but I'd love you to see these questions and to ponder how I can apply these questions to my practice and I would love to discuss it later, whether it's going to be after the lecture or in our chat, how you explore and experiment with these questions in your own artistic work. It would be brilliant.
So obviously later I'm going to send a PDF of this deck so you're going to have everything handy. So we said that the artist's task is always to reveal hidden structures, right? And Mechanical Eye, in other words, the invention of photography and film, helped and not only helped artists to see behind our eye or what can our natural eye see, right? And to expand their perception.
So in 1879, Leland Stanford, a wealthy businessman makes a bet. During a horse galop, do all four hoofs ever leave the ground? And painters started to argue. Anatomy said that was impossible.
So no one can see the truth because the human eye was too slow to understand and to resolve this problem. So my bridge solved this dispute. How? He's lining up cameras with trip wires.
So the horse runs, the shutters fire and the film reveals what no human eye has ever seen before, right? The horse floating for a fraction for a while, for some seconds in mid-air.
So from that moment on, machines know more about reality than we do. And a human being right now feels "Impotent to that, machine eye knows more." So reactions to that were swift and really mixed. And upon seeing the gero type, the painter Paul Delaroche declared that from today painting is that. And meanwhile, poet Charles Baudelaire was just trying to bully other artists saying that it is just photography kind of a refuge of failed painters who cannot copy the reality. And the public common people Obviously, they were enchanted because The invention of camera democratized visibility. Suddenly anyone could own a piece of the world, an image of something that was really important for them.
So across Atlantic, while my bridge was dissecting motion frame by frame, Edison Laboratory was hard at work giving it life, so moving this. And in the 1890s, His assistant, Dickson, created the kinetograph and shortly after the kinetoscope, capturing and displaying this movement.
So photography and film started to reveal what had been invisible to human perception. As Soviet filmmaker, and here I really love to remember him, Dzigavert of Champion, and invented the word kino eye, what it means. He said that this camera's mechanical eye was more perfect than the human eye. And it hurts sometimes, right? Because, and where is my place in this? If Kinoai can see even more and this Kinoai is able to reveal hidden truths through slow motion or magnification. And Walter Benjamin coined the term for this phenomenon. He said that it's all about optical unconscious. Just as Freud, do you remember he revealed unconscious desires that drive our behavior?
So Benjamin and his researchers, he argued that the camera exposed unconscious structures within vision. And Man Ray abandoned the lens entirely because he started to place objects directly onto light-sensitive paper and expose them to light.
So in these experiments, a toothbrush becomes a spectrically silhouette or objects appear like ghosts, right, as if conjured by subconscious light. And Harold Edgerton went into to the opposite direction because he decided to opt for extreme precision using this stroboscopic flash. He froze events faster than human perception could follow, right? And here you can see on the slides a bullet piercing glass or a drop of milk blooming into a perfect crown and that's pretty strange.
So while we are speaking about capturing the movement, I cannot Evolving mentioning Michael Weasley because he explored slowness and slowness of the movements. His cameras remain open not for a second, as we can imagine right now, not for minutes, but for years. And in his open shutter series, he was documenting moments of reconstruction.
So we can see whole buildings, rise and vanish in a single frame. So we can see all the movements that was happening to these buildings along years, even not on the minutes, right?
Yeah. I love his photographs. I agree totally.
So here comes the question. What do you think being an artist right now I would invite you to understand what else we can use in order to dissect the reality.
So if the camera reveals an optical unconscious, what other devices we can use or what other devices can reveal what the human eye cannot see? What do you think?
- Google Maps. Love that. Thermal photography, good. Microscope. Very precise. Film or plane time, okay. Telescope, beautiful.
Yeah, microscope, telescopes, kaleidoscopes, x-rays, aerial photography, infrared, radio waves. All of them are extensions of this photographic principle, right? And German photographer Karl Strover in 1926 created micrographs by attaching cameras to microscopes, as you mentioned, right? It's one of the brilliant instruments. And later in next lectures, we're going to speak about bio art and all these microscopes that are helping to create a work of art.
So his microscopes are trying to capture this abstract forms or diatoms, atoms or biological specimens, blending these science and art. We are really next to art science here.
So in his archetype of individuality, he transformed this microscopic organic structures into geometric obstructions through, at that time or then, innovative techniques such as multiple exposure and different kinds of approaching or making it closer and then seeing in seeing what kind of elements are there, right? And somebody of you mentioned x-rays, right?
So Ahmed Mehter brought the x-rays into dialogue as well, but into dialogue with something more, with the divine. So being a trained physician, he overlaid hospital radiographs of skeletons. He was using his own skeleton than a praying figure, a pregnant woman, and he combined it with Islamic illumination and gold-leafed scripture.
So the inside of the body usually hidden in hospitals or this death, we can speak about that here. Here it appears surrounded by prayer, so medical truth meets here spiritual invocation. And what lies beneath the skin becomes not just anatomy but a kind of a revelation.
So the body both sacred but at the same time scanned by science. And then there is Trevor Poglen and I really love him because he points the camera at what cameras themselves try to hide. And cameras in this case are trying to hide something and cameras are trying here to reveal it. There is an interesting intersect and connection in between cameras.
So he was trained initially as a geographer and that's why Paglin photographs the unseen architecture of surveillance, right? Secret satellite bases in the desert, undersea internet cables, all the things that it's almost impossible not only to see but to have an access.
So he's using telescopic lenses and long exposures and Thanks to that, he captures streaks of light that look like, for example, stars, but in fact, they are machines watching the planets. So what kind of takeaways we have here? Photography and film broke the monopoly of the human eye.
So vision became mechanical, repeatable, and mobile. So machines began to see what we could not see: the too fast, the too small, the too distant, the hidden. And the camera re-edited totally our perception, revealing an optical unconscious beneath ordinary sight. And once Our vision is mediated, reality is no longer singular, right? Because it can be frozen, it can be stretched, dissected, accumulated. And I will leave you here some studio reflections that you may have and then we can discuss all of them.
So as we understand, camera freezes these moments and it shows us what happened and it makes it linger. And obviously here comes Roland Barthes because he called the photography like a paradox. Why? Because it says that both we are witnessing that in the photography, here it is, And this has been because every photograph or every photography at its core is a kind of a tiny time machine. It might be melancholic. It might be miraculous. It might be sometimes accusatory. Right. And he argued that the essence of photography is death.
So the question is why? Because every photo is a record of a moment that no longer exists. It's not a painting of something imagined. It is this wound in time, it is this fracture in time. And this is why photos of the dead or of the living sometimes can feel even ghostly. And in 19th century it was so literal, right? Because families posed deceased children and relatives for post-mortem photographs and right now I totally agree with you that this practice feels disturbing but it reveals how mechanical images began to replace lived memory, what kind of consequences we started having after the invention of photography and filmmaking process.
So the photo prep here became proof that a life had existed. And even when the body was gone, and we can see that, Here is a question for you. Maybe it's a little bit philosophical or psychological. Do you back up your photos because you fear forgetting or because you fear losing? Or maybe you don't do this at all.
You're losing. Interesting.- Super interesting because a century later no backup like that I want you to teach us how not to do that. I'm sorry that our conference starts too late.
So some fears in you. So yeah, a century later, after these photos, Eric Castles shows that this attachment to frozen memory can lead us not to very good psychological implications or problems. In 24 hours in photos in his work he printed 350,000 images uploaded to Flickr in a single day and poured them into a gallery as a mountain of photos.
So what he wanted to show us that we're no longer remembering, that we are drowned in memory. And photography's promise initially to preserve everything right now collapses into the overload.
So here memories turn into disposable data threatening to bury us totally and at this point archiving becomes this pathology of preservation and I want to mention here Nietzsche because he warned that Too much memory is sickness and sometimes we are speaking about preserving things and we are speaking about history and we have to take care of monuments and art objects but Do we need to destroy something so that not to have this overload? So when nothing is allowed to decay, sometimes life becomes paralyzed by this rumination or overload of information.
So that's why German artist Horkheim Schmidt urges us to stop taking pictures. So Rafa said no back up. I would take it to extremes saying no taking pictures, new pictures, because he says that we have to stop flooding planet already drowning in images and his resistance is really radical because he produces no new photographs at all and instead what he does he collects the ones we abandoned so he collects snapshots from flea markets forgotten for example family albums discarded hard drives or online auctions because he treats the photography or the photograph not as something to be created but as a material to be sorted.
So in other people's photograph He doesn't restore these lives or recover their stories. He reorganizes them into typologies.
So here are people holding cats, people in front of cars, people cutting birth cakes, displayed in grids. This personal memory starts to lose this narrative and personality, something individual, right? Here it becomes a kind of a pattern. A private moment turns into something very repeatable and repeatable unit, and we are close here when life becomes a data set.
So, sealing this life, our life, into images leads to a very unpleasant condition, an interesting but unpleasant condition, what Gideborg called the society of the spectacle. It is a world where everything that was directly lived has moved away into representation.
So history becomes here what is photographed and the image no longer records the event. The image right now is the event.
So this was already visible not only when Guy Debord mentioned that, but in 1898 when photographers bribed their way into Otto von Bismarck's dust chamber. So images of his corpse circulated through newspapers, the morning crowds of mourners who had never been present in life. And the photographs did not merely record history. Right now it manufactured a historical event. And in this case, death became spectacle, something very special. Intimate turned public and more than synchronized through mass messages, images that was really uncommon at that time. A century later, the mechanism remains the same, only now the images, they don't just amplify the reality, they can fabricate it entirely from zero. The yes-men, what they are doing, they try to impersonate corporate spokesmen and broadcast fake news reports announcing some outrageous policies, right, which audiences really believed, and not because the content was plausible, they believed it because the format was authoritative.
So they proved, the yes-men proved that in mass media, legitimacy belongs to the frame, not to the message. It doesn't necessarily mean that I have to say something and you will believe me, but the format.
So if it looks like news, it is news. And the same logic appears in the work of Thomas Demand. Demand begins with a low-resolution media photograph of a charged event, for example, a political interior or a crime scene or a natural disaster, and enlarges it to life-size images installations because he starts to reconstruct every surface from paper and cardboard. But what he does next, he takes photos of this model in high resolution, then destroys completely this model so that the final photo becomes the only surviving object.
So it's a kind of a triple mediation as I put in here on the slide, from event to news image, then to paper replica, and then to pristine print. Demand's images fabricate this history as spectacle. There is no original space anymore. We cannot return to this original space. No authentic scene behind this picture, only a representation that replaces what it depicts. And once images become these events, They begin to manufacture not only events, but they begin to manufacture identity, authority, subjectivity. When Richard Prince rephotographed this Marlborough cowboy advertisement, he was saying that What was remained here is pure mythology because we don't see, it's not that important to see here a cigarette campaign, nothing like that. It's all about masculinity. It's about frontier freedom. It's all about solitary heroism.
So it's not only about a man, but it's about a visual code. The images here, they did not sell cigarettes. They are selling here identity. And Baudrillard gave this condition a name. He called it simulacra, what it means. It is a world where copies no longer refer to originals, where images collapse Once they claimed to depict or they used to depict, reality right now is not hidden behind the representation. It's completely replaced by it. And once images replace reality, they acquire, as we understand, new authority, right? Right now, images are most important things or they are more important than events itself.
So for the first time in history, reality appears to have this impartial influence impartial witness. The camera never lies, people say at that time, and they believed it so deeply that even ghostly double exposures were accepted as proofs of spirits. And that's why I'm just showing you this contradiction. The camera never lies and they believed that these ghosts, these spirits existed. And images entered courts, they entered newspapers, laboratories, and they have this power of saying that is completely true.
So Orson Welles didn't like that and he started to mock on that and he decided to test just how trusting modern audiences, how modern audiences are trusting these new media, these new photos, these new images. And in 1938, his radio broadcast of War of the Worlds presented a fictional alien invasion in the tone of live news reports So listeners, they mistook this performance for reality and it is sad that panic spread, but not because the story was convincing by itself, but because the format was. And we have already - Yeah, so we have already seen that, right? The format here, one more time, is more important than the content itself.
So, Wells shows here that in the age of mass media, credibility lies not in the content, but in the voice of transmission. So here comes the question, who decides what camera shows? And obviously we cannot avoid mentioning here, a survey as interesting because Eisenstein mastered here I pronounce it like a Russian, but Eisenstein mastered it. The person who is behind the camera is controlling everything and Eisenstein described montage as a kind of a collision of images that manufacturers thought. He called this intellectual montage. Why? Because one shot doesn't simply follow another, it transforms it and I'm showing here on a slide that how one picture might be interpreted really differently just because another picture changes.
So meaning emerges not from the picture, not from the image, but meaning emerges in the space between images. And it happens, for example, in one of his works, in one of his films in Odessa and within the battleship Potomkin and we see Odessa steps, we see fleeing crowds, we see marching soldiers, fallen bodies and the baby carriage hurtling down the stairs. No single short here can be interpreted alone. It should be interpreted in the whole narrative and that's why we feel it really physically what's going on. Eisenstein didn't want to lull audiences into this passive viewing that we are just consuming the reality, but he wanted films to think with the spectator. Eisenstein, it's interesting, he was inspired by cubism and he believed that reality must be broken into these fragments and must be reassembled, rearranged from multiple angles because a new society that was building authorities for us, for him authorities because he was really connected to Soviet power. New society demanded new ways of seeing. And later Walter Benjamin would say that the film shatters our habitual perception and montage may stretch and at the same time compress time, rearranging totally causality as we see here in montage.
So time becomes editable structure and artists obviously are gonna criticize that and benefit from that. And most importantly, when we watch a film editing It feels so natural. We sometimes even cannot analyze and cannot perceive that we are being manipulated. We think that's We ourselves assemble the story in our heads correctly and we're going to do right now an experiment. Let's watch a video by Christian Marclay and try to answer the question: Does this piece have a plot or not? We're not going to watch it entirely, I'm going to put you several fragments. But I want you to answer this question.
So, don't think that's a Let's start from here. Is there any food? All right. When does your bus leave? Thank you for the conversation.
Haiver | 47:55
And it's up.
Polina Rud | 48:08
It's better than sliding down a chimney. I don't know that. A jerky! That's how we do it.
Thank you. She's not. Good night.
So let's pause here. What do you think? Is there any plot? Or not. Kaber is just texting me that the sound is perfect but there is something with the video, right?
So the playback is a little bit stuttery. But anyways, I think the idea is pretty clear here. What do you think? Is there any plot or not? Does this piece have a plot or not? That what they are saying sometimes is important, but I just chose this fragment where what they are saying is not that important. Okay. Maybe it would be a good idea. I couldn't see any of the other interesting. Maybe it's going to be a good idea to send you this video and then you will do this experiment or you will experience it by yourself. You're an artist, that's why you know the answer: random scenes. But when this experience was done with common people going to an exhibition or seeing this work, I'm projecting a thought. I completely agree with Patricio what he's saying because this work is a pure demonstration that's while I was watching it that we are incapable of watching without narrating so this work is a 24-hour video composed of thousands of film clips each featuring a clock or a spoken reference to time.
So every single minute on screen corresponds exactly to real time in the gallery. And obviously you were, you've sent it in MoMA, beautiful.
So, and obviously, there is no blood. There is no storyline, there is no characters, right? There are no characters there. And yet there is something strange that at least happening to me right? Because we anticipate what kind of scene might come next and then we start to search for emotional continuity between unrelated fragments. We start inventing these invisible stories that were never edited into the work.
So Marclay shows that narrative is not only something that's constructed by filmmakers, but exactly, we're creating some narrative out of the chaos. That's so true.
So it's not only bioinformatics By filmmakers, it is produced by the viewer's mind itself. So that's why there is no such a thing as truly... Truly plotless film.
Yeah. Which word? Then we'll come back to that.
Yeah, so there is no such a thing as plotless film, not because every film has a narrative, but because you saw that our mind insists on creating one. And even Surrealist in 1920 they created films that at these unrelated images and they simply followed one another but yet still audiences they were trying to find these stories as you mentioned inside of the chaos right so we cannot as human beings we cannot tolerate randomness we turn it into meaning and this is precisely why montage is so powerful whoever controls this sequence of images controls our attention totally and Andy Warhol decided at one moment to push this logic to its limit because in Empire he presents an eight-hour static shot of Empire State Building nothing happens no plot no action and Then we'll speak about this quote.
So there is no plot, no action, no montage, and yet the audience waits for something. Maybe for a light to flicker, maybe a shadow to shift, maybe a sign that something will finally occur. And we are just watching the Empire State Building But still suspense emerges where there is no story. The film turns viewers into hunters of micro events and watching in this case becomes this act of strained expectation. Warhol I think exposes this strange dependency. We need events to justify our attention and when none are given we begin We began inventing ourselves this connection in between these images.
So by the mid 20th century, moving images entered private homes. Unprecedented scale. Newsreels weren't shown in cinemas, right now they are at homes, right? In our living rooms. And by 1953, two-thirds of American households owned a television. And by 1960s, almost 90% did.
So the average viewer spent lots of time, hours, every single day in front of the screen. And advertising industries, they decided, okay, we have to benefit from that. And they understood that. Television's power is to shape our desires and then obviously to gain money from that. And many artists and thinkers began to see television not like something neutral. They understood that it's not a neutral window, but it is a machine for formatting, for creating our reality. In 1977, Susan Sondag observe the rise of what she called "eithetic consumerism". It is a condition in which people need reality confirmed and experience intensifies only through images.
So, to leave increasingly meant to consume life Fotographically. That's so absurd. We cannot leave the events that are happening. We have to consume photographs of these events, whether they're moving images or static images.
So with television, seeing the world no longer means witnessing it directly. It means watching the world delivered, watching the world shown. And early video artists believed that if television shaped society, then television must be criticized using its own tools. Because if we have problems with television, we should take television or a TV set and to work with that, to work with this substance, to work with this material. In 1975, Sony released the Portafox, so the first affordable handheld video camera and since then artists could not be stopped. For the first time artists could record and immediately display moving images without film laboratories or broadcast studios and Nam June Paik was a person who benefited from that Totally, completely, he was a phloxist musician and provocateur at the same time because he treated television as both toy and weapon and in his earliest intervention Yeah, Patricio, so agree with you. I would love to give a separate lecture about Nam June Khoik because he was a visioneer and how he perceived the television and technologies not only in critical manner but he really predicted everything that we're having right now, for example, an online lecture, right? Because online lecture, it's all about how Nam June Paik was thinking about reconnecting lots of people all around the world without any limits, cultural limits or physical limits, right?
So coming back to that, he treated television as a toy and as a weapon. And in his earliest intervention, he physically attacked the broadcast image itself. In Magnet TV, he placed the powerful magnet on top of a working television. What happened? The picture band warped, collapsed into abstract currents.
So the evening news suddenly dissolved into pure signal. With this gesture, Pike is trying to reveal that what appeared authoritative, as we saw, right, and stable, on the other hand, was in fact this fragile electronic code and reality on television we see right now could be totally twisted by an invisible force which is magnet in this case. In TV Buddha, a bronze Buddha, sits calmly before a television display in its own live video feed.
So the statue starts to watch itself watching itself in an infinite loop. It is humorous, meditative, and at the same time disrupting because Pike turns television into a mirror of consciousness and a trap, as we see, because the Buddha here, this symbol of enlightenment, is caught in an endless self-worth preservation, suggesting that television transforms even the spiritual reflection into post-circuit feedback. And when this reflection becomes inescapable, Pike pushes into opposite direction towards success. And right now we'll see it in another work. In electronics superhighway, what he does, hundreds of flashing monitors map the United States.
So each state's screaming images, commercials, cultural cliches, and it feels like watching television. It's all about noise and we feel that we are being swallowed by it. And in this case, information becomes noise.
Shows that television is not a neutral window onto the world. It is an architecture of perception. And right now, once the architecture is visible, right now we understood that we are not being manipulated and we see that and it can no longer claim its innocence, that it is just showing pictures to us. And Bostel here pushed this revelation into matter itself because he declared that the television is the sculpture of the 20th century. What did he do? He embedded life monitors into canvases, metal, concrete, and in works like TV Decollage, news anchors speak from inside salmon cloaks, so commercials pulse from within painted surfaces. The screen is right now an organ that is inserted into our body.
So much about our smartphones and screens. By dragging television out of the living room, and we remember I started with that, the TV was almost in every single apartment, and he's trying to drag this television out of the living room and into the museum, and by doing that, he performs a crucial displacement. He shows that at home TV feels natural, effortless, domestic, but in the gallery it becomes strange and physical and he's trying to strip it out of this couch and coffee context and starts to show that television should be considered or should be seen as a machine that delivers ideology, that delivers desire, that it's not my desire, it's not my fear, it's everything that television is delivering me ideology fear desire consensus sometimes and once it is isolated from the comfort of my couch it can be confronted contradicted and even buried in concrete as he does right now from living room to every pocket i love that so my question to you is who is the product in television whether it is the program or the viewer, what do you think? I'm more than sure that he know the answer. What do you think? Who is the product right now? Exactly. That's all about the viewer. And while we are speaking about that, not mentioning this work of art, I think is a crime because television truly or social media delivers people as attention, data, consumers and we're being delivered to advertisers, to the powerful and Richard Serra in his work which is called the same "television delivers people" What is that? It's nothing but white text scrolling on a blue screen accompanied by this gentle elevator music so that to feel a little bit more comfy with that. No images, no spectacle, which is really important here. But only this blunt statement. Television does not deliver programs to audiences. It delivers audiences to advertisers.
So he's removing all these visuals that may entertain us, And he says, no. Right now you're going to look at what entertainment normally hides, this economic structure beneath the screen.
So this work may seem pretty boring, but that is precisely the point, the boredom, because of this work. Because once stripped of seduction, the system starts to speak as it is, plainly, right? There is nothing to hide, and we see the structure as it is. Douglas Davis targeted television illusion of this intimacy because while we are one to one with our screen, we feel that we have this intimate dialogue. And in the last nine minutes, he addresses viewers directly through the screens. And he's speaking as if it was a very private conversation. And you feel seen because somebody is speaking to you, but the problem is that you cannot respond. And Davis exposes the central paradox of broadcast media. On the one hand, it simulates connection while keeping viewers isolated, right?
So I'm just trying to say that we have this intimate connection so that you can trust me, right? But then I'm saying, no, you don't have any rights or you don't have any ability to speak to me.
So the first wall here breaks, but only unfortunately on one side. And that's the unjust part, another unjust part of television. Brooke pushed this television logic into shock. In Softie Tape, his cheerful commercials for facial tissues flicker in rapid alternation with footage of war and violence.
So the pace is identical, everything is similar, and emotion in this case flattens because tragedy and consumption of some products that they want to sell us become interchangeable units in the same signal flow. He reveals here that television has its most dangerous trick. Not censorship, but emotional leveling. There is no difference how we experiment war or how we experiment commercial.
So the ability of TV set or of television to make everything feel equally disposable. And from here, critique becomes action. In TV Hijack, Chris Burton storms a live broadcast studio with an eye for attempting to see the transmission itself. And with this extreme gesture, he shows that broadcast authority It is really fragile, we can destroy it physically and it can be interrupted. In New York, the collective paper Tiger TV built low budget pirate programs that dissected mainstream news and advertising and these political messages from inside this television format.
So they started to use homemade sets, college aesthetics and direct to camera commentary. They exposed how headlines are framed and how experts perform this authority, how images shape opinion. And their strategy, as you see, was really simple. They used television to explain how television works. In Soviet Union or in the post-Soviet context mostly, Vladislav Mamyshev-Monroe performed a different kind of hijack. They played with that. They produced fake television broadcasts that perfectly mimic the visual language of official state media, for example, news desks, patriotic graphics, obviously, when speaking about Russia, authoritative voiceovers, but inserted very absurd, surreal and subversive content. He revealed that in the media culture power lies less in what is said, but in how it is packaged, right?
So if the format is credible, the fiction becomes believable. And some artists chose not to infiltrate television, but because they were saying, "Okay, we understood how it works. We're going to attack it physically." So the collective media burned stage performances where a car literally crashed into a wall of television sets. These violent collision between human body machine and the spectacle so it's not a metaphor right, it was a literal confrontation with the object that had colonized domestic life. A kind of a declaration that the screen was no longer untouchable physically. Marshall McLuhan famously argued that the media are not simply channels carrying content. They are environments that shape our perception. The medium is the message. And as we have seen, artists stopped criticizing what television showed, the content, and they began examining how television structured experience itself. Our attention, intimacy, authority, desire, So images began as records of moments, as we saw, speaking about our takeaways, right? But gradually became structures that organize our memory itself. We spoke about past and the past no longer lived right now in our minds, right? But in our archives, databases, feeds, screens, memory shifted from this lived experience to something that we are going to store, to stored representation. And obviously as a kind of a consequence. Right now we are overloaded completely. The image stopped documenting events and began producing them, shaping public history, collective emotion, social belief, even events. And as we saw with the example of Eisenstein, montage, broadcast and mass media revealed that the most important person is the person who controls image sequence, and this person is going to control attention. And Thus, it's going to control and maybe even organize and create reality. By the late 20th century television and this kind of mass imagery became the environment in which the world appears.
So right now we don't see directly the reality, but it is completely mediated. So here I'm going to leave you one more time other questions for your studio reflections, how you can work with this topic, and then we'll come back to that. I will be really interested how you're attending these questions with your work, so with the philosophy or angle that you're working with.
So once the medium becomes the message, as we said, a new question appears: what happens when the medium is no longer a screen but a computer? So at that moment images stop flowing in broadcast time and they begin existing as data. Let's imagine 1980. A young artist named Nancy Burson, I think you know her, she's sitting in front of her computer, she's not painting, she's not photographing, she's scanning. Scanning faces with a digitizer and she's translating portraits into numerical coordinates. She marks key points on a face such as, I don't know, nose, location of eyes and marks these points in the second picture.
So the computer then distorts the first face to match the shape of the second face while gradually blending the two. And then we have a new face, calculated face, not photographed face, not painted face, but calculated. This process later known as digital morphing. She co-created the first patented facial morphing software, a technology later adopted by the FBI and used to age photographs of missing children leading to these real world rescues but surveillance and control, right? Because once we can have this technology, it's not only for good, but for controlling people as well.
So her work merged art and science decades before it became common practice right now, anticipating, as we can say, today's conversation around AI and biometrics. Berson begins blending portraits into synthetic visages. In Warhead 1, she merges the faces of Reagan, Brezhnev, Mitterrand, and what we see a collective portrait of global nuclear warheads. This political power right now becomes facial geometry. And I have a question again for you, who is merged here? That's one of her recent works.
Well.
Yeah, that was easy. Exactly.
So, In 2018, Time magazine commissioned her two babies. Yes. Powerful babies. Commissions her to merge Donald Trump, as you mentioned, and Putin for summit crisis cover. And the human face, as we see, becomes something that can be computed, modified, generated, an image no longer is bound to a body.
So human face becomes a data set and once identity becomes this data, vision itself enters the domain of surveillance as we spoke about. So photography showed us the reality can be frozen. Cinema taught us that reality can be assembled through montage. But what does digital media do? Images right now are no longer fixed frames. They are modular units, like for example pixels, files, data sets that can be stored, sorted, searched, recombined, generated. And Lev Manovich knew a lot about that. He named this condition database logic, meaning no longer here arises from linear storytelling. It doesn't matter here. But what matters is structure, correlation, accumulation, algorithmic recombination.
So he frames media itself as a kind of a programmable matter. What are Manovich principles? They are numerical representation.
So what it means? Where digital images are made of numbers. We have already seen that. Modularity. These digital Elements remain independent building blocks.
So clips, pixels, files, they can be rearranged without destroying the whole image. Automation. Once images are numerical modular, why not to create a software that can operate on them automatically? Next. No digital image has a singular form and that's so interesting because it can be resized, recolored, recompressed or regenerated endlessly.
So you have a work of art that doesn't have any end. It can be changed. Infinitely. Transcoding. Finally, images right now exist simultaneously as visual culture and at the same time as computer data. What it means? A photograph here is a file, but a face is an array, right?
So vision is translated here into machine readable language, but it has this cultural layer. And this transformation did not arrive suddenly.
That's why I'm going to show you right now different works that were created long before all these principles. But it's very important because before creating these principles, we have to witness what was going on before the theory existed, right? Artists, they had already begun building these logics, right? Artisan science, then Sandin, between 1971 and 74, designs what will become known as the Sandin image processor. It's an analog video computer and often it is described as the video equivalent of a MOOC synthesizer. Instead of generating sound, it generates vision.
So the machine accepts these basic video signals and modulates them through voltage, oscillation and feedback, bending and folding the signal in real time. And in this work, the spiral a glowing dotted spiral morphs with electronic hums and water sounds demonstrating the image processor as a real-time video performance instrument. And right now it's in MoMA's collection, right? And he refused to patent it instead encouraging artists to copy it, right? Distributing these schematics so others could build their own. I think it's very noble from his part to do that. Let's see. Small part of that. How it's going.
-
Chance to explore a little bit more if you need that. So the Vassoulkas family, working with the engineers, turned video signal into artistic language. They constructed a modular video instrument or even instruments. They are machines that treated the television signal the way a Munch synthesizer again treated sound.
So the most famous was this Root Etro video synthesizer. And instead of allowing the scanning beam inside the monitor to draw a stable rectangular picture, the machine could bend and twist the beam itself.
So the picture was a sculpted ribbon of energy and brightness, contrast, color, geometry were now controlled by voltage. So when feedback loops made the image regenerate endlessly. And let's see it in violin power. Stainer plays her violin and the sound of the instrument feeds directly into the video synthesizer. Her bow strokes , how it's happening. Her body, her instrument and the electronic picture form a single feedback organism.
So she's not accompanying an image, she's playing it directly.
For example, in noise fields, these horizontal scan lines undulate like water on the invisible forces. So they are using these voltage control oscillators that alter hue, saturation, luminance in real time.
So they reveal that this TV signal, it's a kind of a raw material and might be before the time.
And very soon, break. - Itself. Became a site of mutation. Swedish public TV becomes this experimental laboratory and a monument to Rde Sjlnder hijack Sweden TV scene or TV process converting film to video signals. And these cultural monuments Yeah, it's worth watching.
So I'm going to leave you all the links so that you can just dive deeper and see in details, watch in details that. Cultural monuments distort this mid-transfer.
So Chaplin melts here. We're going to see it right now. Sculptures. Start to stretch leaders come towards Bye. - Famous figures infected by electronic disease.
- By 1980s, artists began imagining the world's... I don't know why it's happening. Where images no longer needed humans at all, not humans to be distorted by, but we don't need any human. Max Helmy in Living the 20th Century is using then experimental computer graphics and digital video effects and constructs a three-part narrative.
So the first one, countdown, departure, arrival. Unfortunately, I couldn't upload the full video into the deck, so I included a series of still I'll share a later of the link so you can watch the complete work afterwards. What is he doing? In countdown, a man receives, as we see here, receives daily input directly into his head through televised signals, embodying a society where experience arrives pre-processed by media. And in countdown, a real person unconscious absorption of this TV daily input becomes scandalous. Crumbled signals akin to analogue stories uploaded and distorted, changed into binary databases. In Departure, a woman lives simply because there is nothing good on television and yet once outside the spectacle she wanders totally lost because right now a human is without a screen and this human being cannot exist. He doesn't have any coordinates or she doesn't have any coordinates in this case.
So throughout the work bodies float like detached objects, as you see here. So they are removed to these movable elements inside the computational field and in the arrival segment what it does. Figures, they start to be inside of a digital void of these failed transmissions symbolizing data trapped without any narrative context, like entries in a sterile archive.
So this Critics Media is a proto-database. Humans start to be reduced to searchable, non-interactive fragments. And this work visualizes this transformation of human experience in the digitized and fragmented data. It depicts how people are like raw story inputs because we see that live performers that we saw in the first part were captured on video, but then they processed into dehumanized database entries.
So once image exists as data, it breaks into independent modules, clips, frames, sounds, text blocks and meaning becomes, as we mentioned, as something that can be organized like free agents on the metrics. Totally agree. Independent modules, what they are: clips, frames, sound, tech blogs, and meaning becomes something that can be organized. And Lev Manovich, we have already mentioned him, developed soft cinema, precisely asking this new question: if our daily lives are shaped by constant interaction with streams of data, like messages, feeds, interface. How can cinema visualize this new kind of experience? And in soft cinema, Minowich does not edit a film into these fixed sequences like a montage. Instead what he does, he builds a database of video clips, still images, text fragments and soundtracks. And a voiceover narrative is pre-recorded, so everything else what appears on the screen where it appears, in which order it appears is assembled by software.
So there is no director behind that and it is assembled by software in real time. So the system follows a set of compositional rules combined with the controlled randomness. And Manovich describes it as a semi-automatic film jockey, a cinema that performs itself life.
So every single time predictable algorithm actually, yeah, totally. So the result is this film that never repeats itself because every single time it has been rearranged, reassembled. And each screening produces a different constellation of places, gestures, micro events, characters reappear in different and new contexts. Ori Archangel in Super Mario Cloud hacks this cartridge of Super Mario Brothers. And we know this artifact of our digital childhood. By rewriting the game's code, Archangel erases all sound and visual elements except only one. This iconic, scrolling blue sky was dripped in pixel clouds. And the game still runs, but nothing happens. It's like, okay, it can still exist. And on a formal level, we can say that this gesture recalls Moldenist painting move towards this abstraction because they were asking how many elements can be removed before the original image becomes unrecognizable.
So Archangel isolates a single graphic module and reveals the hidden construction of the game. So the Mario universe right now is not a seamless world.
Right? So it's something that's or it is a stack of independent visual layers assembled on demand by code and by extracting this one layer Archangel exposes digital architecture itself.
So code becomes this landscape, meaning emerges throughout combination. And at this point, the image is no longer something that we look at. It is something that runs.
So I created a table for you where I organized the works we have seen right now, according to Manovich principles. Obviously, they were created before. But I wanted to structure a little bit what was happening so you can clearly see how these logics of images have shifted over time because obviously the Novich principles, they did not appear from zero.
So images are no longer visible. These things that communicate the content, right? They are not like singular frames or sequences. What we saw in this part, they are, these images are modular elements that can be stored, sorted, recombined and generated. And the meaning emerges right now from structure, correlation and permutation. And once vision becomes data, what's happening? The body becomes describable, the face becomes calculable, identity becomes editable, and narrative does not right now organize images anymore. We see how images right now organize narrative.
So right now I'm showing to you your slide. With studio reflections that you can use while working or you can just ask these questions and maybe you will find something interesting in the practices you have.
So, Coming to conclusions, wrapping up a little bit everything that we saw today. We began in the Renaissance when artists drilled a small hole into a painted panel and placed the human observer at the center of the world. Perspective taught us that to see is to measure, to frame, to possess, and vision became a form of knowledge and a form of power.
So then machines are entering vision and they're revealing what the human eye could never grasp. Invisible time, hidden bodies, secret infrastructures, past as well, right? Because past is frozen right now completely. We have reality expanded but slipped out of our hands, right? We cannot control right now. We began to see through devices that sometimes see for us, so it's out of our control.
And then images we saw, they started to remember and memory left our mind, left our physical head and entered archives, screens, networks, and What is happening? Finally, the post becomes searchable, editable, replayable. And soon images stopped recording events and began producing them, shaping story, beliefs, identities itself.
So finally, images became data, modular, generative, automated. They are no longer... A singular story and they don't need this single story they don't need this single author and they become these environments that assemble reality in real time so What are happening right now? Seeing is no longer a passive act. Seeing right now is a kind of a operation, a computation, a selection, a targeting. And perhaps the task of artists today is not simply to produce images, but to interrupt the regimes of vision that produce us.
So while we had our introduction part, I was speaking a lot about unfinished experiments, and I truly believe that there is a phrase not only in contemporary art industry, but everywhere that nothing new can be created. And I think that if we allow this thought into our hands, that nothing new can be created we are done as artists right so that's why I think that we need these art history lectures philosophy history lectures because we have to search for these experiments that were not finished or have not been finished yet and that's why we are still searching how I can develop something that can be different or how can I continue all of And here I am giving you some kind of questions that you can reflect on and maybe to continue these experiments and I would be really happy to see Some of you are maybe experiments, answers or how you can apply it to your own artistic practices.
So right now we are open to discussion, to any questions that you have. So young.
Yeah.
Haiver | 01:32:23
The first question we got earlier was from Amy. She was asking if the quote-- we cannot tolerate randomness, we turn it into meaning. Is that a quote from someone or is that an idea that, where did that come from?
Polina Rud | 01:32:37
Yeah this idea appeared in my mind while I was doing this lecture so I understood that well actually it's like it's not my idea it's like idea of artists and kind of a saturated thought after preparing and trying to find artists and artworks that were speaking over trying to criticize this part that's Every single time we are creating stories in our heads even in between images that are not connected in between each other.
Haiver | 01:33:15
We have time for a couple more questions if people want to drop stuff in while we're waiting for a couple of those. I just want to throw out, I really love that you opened talking about how perspective is a choice. Even going back to the original perspective drawings and the way the Renaissance started to frame how the world should be drawn versus the flat world of medieval art and Hockney's experiments and Cubism's experiments with that, like Whatever discipline I think artists are working in, that's a takeaway we can all use is to reconsider what is the perspective from which I'm working with. Even if I'm not working with data or remixing narrative in some way, But certainly we are all working from a perspective and vantage point.
So what is that? Have we investigated or interrogated that in our own work? In some way.
Polina Rud | 01:34:07
Yeah, it's all about perspective. I think that's a - Award. Interpretation sometimes might be changed into perspective, how we see that, right?
So in art, it's all about how we criticize the reality. And I think that being an artist is finding this perspective, my own perspective on what's going on. - Absolutely.
Haiver | 01:34:29
We got another question here from Carlos. Is there going to be enough technology to keep pushing art practices?
Polina Rud | 01:34:39
What do you mean by enough technology? I'm really interested in that. I think that every single time while we are speaking about technology and next time we are going to see that, how everything that's going on right now had already been discussed, had already been created in art.
So that's why I think that If we are not done as humanity in the upcoming 10 or 20 years. We're gonna have enough creativity in order to push technology and in order to push art as it is, I think so. If I understood correctly your question. Peter is asking about will artists replace AI? Or will artists be replaced by AI? That's a good question. I think that AI, it's all about learning from us. It's all about assembling things, ideas, pictures, images, whatever. But the connection that we can have with the divine, let me use the word here, and it's something irreplaceable because AI doesn't have this connection or maybe It's not having it yet. I hope it's not going to have it in the future. But at the same time, AI doesn't have these perceptual opportunity to watch the reality. Next time we're going to speak about this question whether technology every single time may improve their perceptual capacities, we are going to speak about systems and how to create that, but once technology is not that equal on the perceptual level as we are, I think it's impossible for us.
So it can help us, but on perceptual level we are incomparable still. Right.
Haiver | 01:36:49
I think we're going to do two last questions. And then whatever other questions people have, please just drop them into the art discussion channel. Art lecture discussion channel, like just pepper all the questions in there and we'll hop in and start responding as we can in the coming days.
Yeah. I see one here from Moxon. Should digital art only be about nostalgia? Can it be about current design and its vision? Even UI if we consider the one we have on MacBooks rather than its older interface.
Polina Rud | 01:37:24
I think it's all about the tendency of your mind, how you think about that retrospectively and/or you're thinking about envisioning futures. So it's very important how you use that. You can use photos, speaking about some nostalgia or retrospective criticism, but speaking about Nam June Paik, right? He was a great visionary. He was trying to design future and to predict everything that was possible. About to come.
So that's why I think it's like perspective is a choice, using tools is a choice as well. What you're gonna think about the future, about how to be useful with your art tools in order to create different and possible futures, or you're gonna be nostalgic That's a choice, I think.
Haiver | 01:38:22
Yeah, I get really excited about artists who are making art about the internet and what it means to be, right, creating ourselves and presenting that self-identity, which is still an avatar of a type, even if we're not hiding behind an avatar, even if it's our face, we are still creating that and performing it. Our last question here comes from Drea. Does scarcity itself generate a derivative form of vision?
Polina Rud | 01:38:52
That's an interesting question. That's - The scarcity of what? I don't know. At the point where we are now right now, maybe it's a good idea to explore the abundance of our perception of how we envision ourselves inside of a physical space because if we are going to speak about scarcity of us then obviously AI or supreme intelligence is gonna I think this derivative form of vision was created in order to see how we can optimize our vision and our capacities and to control better, to see better There is one thing that I really love while we're speaking about vision. There is a place in Chile and Argentina where the platforms collided and there are some stones that are growing, but our perception cannot Note that they're growing at the moment, but obviously the speed, the pace that they are growing with is really small, it's unnoticeable.
So here is the question that whether we will be able to do this with the vision or we have to develop another type of perception in order to, and here I'm struggling with the word, whether it is to see or to, I don't know, to perceive it in different way. Are we still end up with organs, perceptual organs that we have? Or we can grow new ones and are it here or how? Has answered to that and there were different artists that were experimenting with this perceptual capacities, right? With their bodies, obviously.
Haiver | 01:41:06
Yeah, I think that's true with any artwork that deals with nature in some way. You're trying to embody a time scale that the singular object itself cannot contain.
So amazing. I love seeing everyone's comments about this lecture and how it's been obviously super rich. I'll try to get this up pretty quickly so people can revisit parts of this. You'll have the slides. A lot of this, I just want to point out, is about having inspiration for yourself.
Like if there was an artist that you came across that you weren't familiar with, who worked in a particular way that resonated with you want to go and check them out more. If you we're going through and there was an idea or a quote that you wanted to write down and maybe pin in your work area or pin on your mirror, something that you, again, will continue to inspire you or spur you on, that's fantastic.
And then of course, we're going to have the takeaway forms as well. Those will be things that, again, you can print out and have around, but I would take those question prompts and see how they resonate with your individual practice. This is about giving you material for your many different practices in this program, even as we're focused specifically on the McCoys for these next five weeks, or at this week, point four, three and a half. It's already flying by the first cycle of this first quarter.
So thank you again for being here. Thank you again to Dr. Poon-Yarud for this incredible and very rich lecture. And we will see you all in the chat soon. Thanks.
Polina Rud | 01:42:40
Thank you. Bye-bye. Thank you, Heber.