Haiver | 00:00
Hi, art friends. Welcome back for our final session of the quarter. Congratulations to all of you on making it through. It has been such a joy to experience your work in progress in our cohort feedback sessions, to see your presentations of where you've been, and to meet with you one-on-one in our mentor meetings to discuss where you're going. And figure that out together.
So it has felt very much like art therapy and I find that to be absolutely delightful. I've really enjoyed the questions that each of you have brought, the thoughtfulness you've brought to thinking through your goals for the year and planning what we're going to do over the coming quarters to push you forward as artists and to help you grow.
So we're joined today by Mitchell F. Chan for our final of three sessions we have with him this quarter. As you know, Mitchell is a conceptual artist and artist who's worked in public installation art, who works with technology, made an early and important piece of blockchain-based art, and now largely works in video game art, often intersecting with questions of user agency player autonomy and the limits of that or the lie of that, if you will, as well as intersecting with narrative.
So I'm excited to welcome Mitchell back to specifically talk today about the art world at large and to dig into some of the questions we've explored that were raised, I think, by his presentation and craft lecture. And as always, the structure of these three sessions is set so that the presentation lays out here is the body of work. The craft lecture lays out process and lets us peer behind the studio door. And today is our chance to think about the art world.
So please welcome Mitchell F. Chan.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:59
Hello, everybody. How are you doing?
Haiver | 02:03
We are so glad to have you here. I was reflecting this week about how You and I have spent time together in at least two or three different countries at this point. And I think of you in many ways as a very global artist, but you're a Canadian artist. And I'm curious, how do you balance those things? What do you see as the role of the local and where you come from even as you've gotten a more the international stage.
Mitchell F Chan | 02:33
- Man, this is probably a more loaded question than you might think because I struggle with, I struggle with the art scene here in Canada and in Toronto in particular. I am basically only an international artist. I don't really at this point, I don't really have a profile or a career in Canada or in Toronto.
Sorry, just a second. I tried to log in on the Zoom app and now it's giving me an echo that's really distracting. I tried to switch it off. Okay. Yes.
So, yeah, that's the thing. Here in Canada, the... The Canadian art scene is really separated from the international art scene.
You see, we don't really produce a lot of art stars here in Canada. There are reasons for this.
Some of the reasons are fine. They're valid. It's by design. Arts funding, like, you know, is kind of distributed from the various Canada Council, Ontario Arts Council, Toronto Arts Council, according to, like, I think a pretty well-defined mandate. That mandate, that criteria, isn't necessarily reflected in the values of the international arts scene, and that's fine. In fact, one could make the argument that's an example of a government... Art strategy that works, is that they should fund the things that the global art market doesn't want to fund.
So that's fine. So I'm not really a part of that.
So I'm an international artist and I'm a local husband and father. And that's actually kind of a nice distinction to have. Nobody here, you know, like knows about me or cares. And it would not suggest that like out there, everybody knows and cares, like very famous. But it's just like, but that's the way it is. I roll with it. I enjoy it. And you said that we've seen each other in like three different countries.
Like I make the joke all the time that, yeah, I learned that the art world is just like every month, the same 60 people. Go to the same party in a different country. And that's basically the art world.
Haiver | 05:04
Truly, I was looking at pictures from Art Basel Hong Kong and just like, there are the same people I knew, know and see in Miami or I see here in New York or, you know, like, yeah, it's Hemingway's immovable feast. I think it is.
Yeah. Repetitive but rich.
Yeah. Yeah. Right. The food changes, the decor, the environment changes. Are you, despite not getting the recognition or the opportunities in Canada that you might have hoped for, I'm curious, what is the art scene like in Toronto where you're based? How is it different from say Montreal even or New York?
Mitchell F Chan | 05:44
How There do seem to be these microclimates of art scenes in Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver. I'm not the best qualified to comment on them because, again, you know, I'm not really a part of it. And that's the thing that I talk about with some other Toronto artists. And it's funny because here in Toronto, right, we've got, you know, like we've got Lorna Mills, got Deaf Beef, Matt Hall and John Watkinson started here at University of Toronto, Dimitri Cherniak is from here in Toronto. And now, I'm close with almost all those people. This is the most Canadian thing ever. That we didn't really become friends until we like met on the internet or in New York or whatever. And in particular, like I just, you know, I love Lorna so much for a whole bunch of reasons, but I love, you know, she's been around for a lot longer than me and I love talking to her about her career and, you know, she'll always talk very, and she's always so generous talking with younger artists. There are artists who are less established in their careers about what it was like for her and coming up and thinking that like, you know, everything was to make it in the Toronto art scene, to be at the Toronto International Art Fair or whatever. And she'll be honest about how it didn't really happen for her.
And then she just found her community out there. So this is all stuff that we know. I think most of the people here, we all became artists on the internet. We all found our art communities online. On the internet. And I'll just say, like, you're not the only weirdos who feel like this, that seems like a really natural thing. Our art world feels really untethered from geographic location. I think that's mostly a good thing, not just due to how it allows you to kind of find your people, regardless of geography, but the doors that it opens for people who are parents who have day jobs, right?
Like who like actually couldn't travel to Hong Kong this week and then go to Basel, Switzerland next week. That stuff is just, it's all awesome. It's all great.
So to be honest, I don't even really think too much about that. Geo-locked art communities. And maybe it's because I have the privilege that I like don't, I have a virtual art community, but it's not something I think about a lot.
Haiver | 08:27
Yeah. I mean, some of that is empowered by the fact that you're working in a particular set of mediums, right? The artists you listed have some kind of digital physical hybrid practice in a lot of cases or purely digital practice. I'm curious though, when you talked during your presentation about art school and kind of regretting not building more community in Chicago or going to more parties, which I empathize with. I like cranked through college in three years and was like, why did I do that? I should have been building more connections with, but then I would be working in Hollywood. I'd have a very different life if I'd actually succeeded during that. And I'm curious, like as like, Before you found all of these, you know, digital art friends over the internet and built this community and grew into, you know, being part of this network, like what were you doing to find or build community after art school?
Like, and how has that influenced the way you've moved through the art world?
Mitchell F Chan | 09:26
I was not great at it. I am still not great at it.
I mean, God, man, anybody who's been in my Discord sees that I'm not great at it. Like, I'm just not great at being a dude on the internet, you know, like hanging out. I was really, you just got to figure out a way. To hang around in whatever way, like, is kind of your natural element. And it's like, you don't have to think about it in terms of like, like, find ways to put yourself in like situations like, you know, where you shine, where you can excel.
Like, if it's a situation where you're comfortable, that is when you are at your best. And so it was like being an online person persona has always been uncomfortable for me. It remains uncomfortable for me. I have a real struggle with I guess I'm going to coin this term right now, like the uncanny mirror of like you perform on social media and you get this feedback loop against. And it's not even like the version of me that tweets or posts to Instagram is a lie. It's just a very... A curated slice of yourself that you put online. And to get feedback and responses and relationships through that person, It's a little bit distorted. It's a little bit uncanny. But you've got to push yourself out of your comfort zone a little bit.
So when all this was happening and there's a lot of excitement around online work, it's not the hardest thing in the world to do to throw yourself into a situation where a lot of people are excited and there's a lot of energy and optimism. You can do that. But then, you know, over the course of the, like the past few years, my relationships have turned into, And I don't even want to say IRL because most of my relationships are still mediated through catching up on a Zoom call, sending an email, sending text messages. But, you know, I make sure like, you know, I leave this basement, I leave Toronto in order that I can you know, just have some real one-on-one connection, meeting time with people. And I need that, you know, I need that. And that's.
Haiver | 11:50
Yeah. How would you describe your online persona to anyone who hasn't experienced that part of your social media or Discord presence?
Mitchell F Chan | 12:00
It's like, it's non-existent. It's non-existent. It really, I just, I struggle with like so much. Man, like I was like... I did.
Some of you were there. Actually, some of the people in the audience were there at the talk I did in Marfa. At the talk I did in Marfa. And I know, like, I'm not done. I'm like, okay, I got the video of this. Okay, I got to make a whole bunch of, like, 45-second Instagram snippets to put it out there, you know, just so that people can see it and, like, know what I'm about. And I did. I, like, went into Premiere and I made all these snippets. But then I just, like, forgot to put them on Instagram. And, like, they're always sitting on my hard drive. And I just, like, can't be bothered. And, you know, I just feel, I don't know. I'm just not great at it.
Yeah.
Haiver | 12:40
It's tough. It's super tough.
I mean, is this something that you feel like galleries should be helping with in some way for artists?
Mitchell F Chan | 12:49
Probably. Yeah.
Yeah, they should. Yes, that's a great point. I gotta make someone do this. This isn't my job.
Haiver | 12:57
Yeah, it's got You've So Before we get to the gallery stage of things, I mean, you've been very candid over the two sessions.
Mitchell F Chan | 12:58
People in your corner. Someone else should do this. Thank you for reminding me of that.
Haiver | 13:13
I really appreciate that. But particularly one thing you talked about was spending over 10 years making work you now see as kind of uneven before even arriving at what you consider your first really good artwork. And I'm curious, how did you keep the faith with yourself during that decade? I'm sure you were going through some kind of imposter syndrome at some point, I would guess.
Mitchell F Chan | 13:35
No, not at all. That's the best thing about being an idiot. You don't know how bad you are.
Like, it's the best thing about being, like, delusional. And so it's just the best thing that you can have is youth.
You know, because you don't realize how... You know, bad you are.
You know, at the time. And it's just like, and so you just, you keep going. And if somebody had been around to say, you know, this work isn't really good, it's not really there.
Like, I don't know that I would have. Listened to them. You just kind of had to live through it. And that's why I say like the most important thing that you can do is just keep on buying yourself time. Keep on earning the right to stick around. And that means two things. That means just like economically, like have a job.
Like I said, do not be ashamed to be a working artist. Like do not be ashamed that like you work at Starbucks or you have a teaching gig or you're doing like what ever because that can make your work better and to be comfortable means that you're not making art out of desperation and art out of desperation a lot of times it's not going to work out and when it doesn't work out it's going to be hard to come back from And you just, so you get to keep making, you get to keep making, you get to keep making until eventually you are good. And there is no teacher. Better than time. Time is the best teacher.
So that's what I was always fortunate to have. I always had that hustle.
So that same ethos for you and I that maybe made us not get the most out of college or university, you know, because we were hustling a little bit too hard and thinking that, that's how you get ahead. But it may not be how you get ahead, but it is how you stick around. And I'm pretty grateful for that. So, yeah, that's just how you do it. And I don't think I would have known.
Haiver | 15:52
I'm curious, because you're balancing day job and client work, with trying to make art and trying to build community or find where Which part of the art world do you want to be in? I'm curious if you have any advice for artists who feel demoralized because doing that, like trying to balance, like what helped you keep going during similar times? For yourself.
Mitchell F Chan | 16:17
I mean, it's like, it's just like, you kind of, you have a dream. Like you just, you have a dream. And your dream might be like, your dream is almost certainly Years back, years from now, you may look back at it and realize that the dream was silly or the dream was wrong. You're dreaming for the wrong things or whatever. But That's okay.
That's why you keep doing it. And then the goal really is eventually to get to the point where you keep doing it, not in service of some dream, which is elsewhere, but because you just enjoy the actual process of working on it. Because you enjoy the day-to-day grind. Now, a couple things have to happen for you to be able to actually feel that joy. First of all, your basic needs in life need to be taken care of. It's really hard to just enjoy the feeling of the clay under my fingertips if you don't have a roof over your head. If you don't know how you're going to get groceries for your family this week. Nothing is more important than that stuff.
That's why I say have the job. Find the way to live well and stay close to the things that are close to you that aren't art.
And then eventually, You go from working towards some kind of goal that is out there to working for some kind of satisfaction that is in here whenever you do the work. And the exhibition and the vernissage and the party that comes with that is a part of it, but it's just one part of it. And eventually you get there.
Haiver | 18:01
Yeah, I mean, one of my encouragements to students often is to as soon as you can get down to like, I mean, in design, they would call it right, the minimum viable product, like what can get you in the loop of doing the whole thing. When I teach filmmaking students, it's like, all right, we're going to go through the whole process in like the first five weeks of the semester. And learn if you like doing this. If you don't like doing this, then learn it now when you're in college and don't go spend five years of your career PAing on indie films only to be like, this sucks. And I hate the 12 to 16 hour days and the fact I don't have time for any friends.
Like figure out if you like the work.
Mitchell F Chan | 18:36
And a good thing and a good way, you know, to think of this sort of like, okay, so then why don't I just be a Sunday painter, right? Like, why don't I just paint landscapes on Sundays, because I enjoy it, and I can do it with my friends. And that first of all, that is a totally valid way to live an artistic life. That is a totally, that's, in fact, in a lot of ways, that's a more pure and noble way to live an artistic life than selling it with this financial commerce. But, you know, easy for you to say, you know, like... No, another nice way to think about it is that, no, like you make for yourself, but obviously I don't want to say like lose your ambition for exhibition, for critical praise and commercial success. No, don't lose that ambition. But understand that actually what's nice is the cadence of it.
So what's actually nice is... I work in my studio for six months and there's an exhibition. There's a little bit of feedback from my friends, from critics, from the community. Ooh, there's a little bit of dopamine hit from commercial success and the other things that entails.
And then that gives me the right to go back to the studio for six months, a year, whatever. And actually that cadence is a really nice way to live your life.
So I'm not saying like, forget about like commercial success or whatever. Just you will not live a life that is just all that. That's not the goal.
Like the goal is not despite what some of, despite some of these fucking people, man, I can't believe this shit, but the point is not, to just be at cocktail parties for your whole life. If that's your goal, man, there are easier ways to do that. All right? Now, the goal is to have a nice rhythm and cadence to your life. Okay? Cocktail parties sometimes, like satisfying work on your own most of the time.
Haiver | 20:33
- From what I hear from the artists who make it to the higher echelons, right, is the more, you know, when you go to those cocktail parties, you know, fewer and fewer people, right, is not your friends who are, you know, emerging or mid-career artists, right? You are there to talk with. Curators and gallerists and marketing people and big, rich collectors who have oil money and arms deal money that spend millions of dollars on art. And you're like, do I even want to be at this cocktail party? The higher artists get in their careers, the less I see them going to cocktail parties as much as possible. I'd rather be in a room with my friends.
Mitchell F Chan | 21:15
It goes like a curve. Like, it's more exciting. You go to, like, more and more until, like, the novelty wears off and you go to, like, less and less. That's how it seems. Man, or maybe it's just the really famous artists just aren't at the cocktail parties, you know, where I bump into you. Exactly.
Haiver | 21:34
Exactly.
Mitchell F Chan | 21:36
No, but actually it does make sense. Sorry, go ahead.
Haiver | 21:40
Yeah. I was just curious. How your first gallery show came about, like as you were making the transition through the phase of like public art, which you talked very articulately and like deeply about during your presentation a couple weeks ago.
Like there came a point where you started doing things in white wall spaces. I'm curious how that first one came.
Mitchell F Chan | 22:01
About. Okay, all right. Story time? You want to go to story time? This is fun. Never let anyone make you feel bad for being a tryhard, okay? Because there was nobody more tryhard than me. I'll give you the long version of the story. We have time, right?
Haiver | 22:16
Yeah.
Mitchell F Chan | 22:17
So I was like, so like I said, I decided I want to be an artist as like making some bad, like, you know, just some very mediocre paintings. Actually, I'll give you a hint. And I don't even mind saying it because it's mostly obscured from view. Over my, what is this, my right shoulder, maybe it's mirrored, right?
So there's like all those blobs of paint kind of behind the pinball machine. That is like circa 2008 bad abstract painting that I was doing. You can't see most of it, but it's fine. And it's there. My wife makes me put it up. I was like, "I don't want any of this." I was going No, my wife makes me do it.
Haiver | 22:52
To say, you keep it on your walls. That means something that you keep it on your walls.
Mitchell F Chan | 22:58
Look, I'm literally leaning lumber up against it, which you would not do if you liked the painting. But there it is.
So that's your stink preview. Anyway, like I said, I didn't know anybody in the art world, didn't know in the gallery world. Except for there's this one guy who had a gallery in Montreal, Zeke's Gallery, which was like, it was a real outsider gallery, like, you know, a walk up on Saint Laurent Boulevard. And I asked this guy, you know, I showed him some of my artwork. I was like, do you think I can, you know, you think I can move to the big city and like make it as an artist? And he said, I don't know. All I know. Is that if you want anything in this world, just ask 100 times and be prepared for 99 people to say no. And like one person will say yes.
So I took it really literally. I made 100 copies of my portfolio. And most galleries, they'll tell you cannot just submit portfolios unsolicited. We don't look at them. We will just throw them in the garbage.
So I made my portfolio. I've kept these. I'm proud of these portfolios. They were all in kind of like record album sleeves.
And then you pull out the images and the sleeve was letter pressed. So that if you pulled it out of the envelope, just to throw it in the garbage, you'd feel the bumps on it, right?
Like you would feel that letter pressing and bossing. And I'd be like, just so you will at least have an experience that I designed. That was my attitude.
Anyway, I moved to Toronto. I walked up and down Queen Street West. This is back when all the galleries on Queen Street West. And I just handed them out. Handed out 100 portfolios anywhere. It didn't matter. And I sent them in the mail. I sent them to like... Sent them to MoMA. I did. And I got a nice form letter back from Ann Tenkin.
Like you'll get a form letter back if you just, yeah. And as a rule, the bigger the gallery is, the more, the more likely you are to at least get a nice form letter because they have staff, right? And I collected them all. I sent one to Jay Jopling at White Cube Gallery in London.
Haiver | 25:07
My.
Mitchell F Chan | 25:07
Goodness. And this is so embarrassing, by the way.
Like, this is so embarrassing. Now it's so embarrassing. But at the time, I was like, what else am I going to do?
Anyway, I go up and down. And then eventually, one of these galleries on Queen Street West, probably just feel bad for me. And they're doing group shows, like, you know, every third show is just a group show.
Anyway, so they're like, yeah, you can be in the group show. So I remember I was in, and this was really cool, man. It was in this gallery in Toronto. It was called Spin Gallery. It was a very cool show. Or it was like, it was a very cool gallery. It was run by this like, cool couple Juno and what was the other guy's name? My God. But there was it was like the like sweet cute Asian guy Juno and then the like grumpy older guy.
Haiver | 26:03
And.
Mitchell F Chan | 26:05
They were a couple, but they were always in a tiff and broken up or sleeping with other people, but then getting back together just for Sacred Gallery and stuff. And they said, okay, all right, we'll get you.
So I'm so excited. My work is going to be on the wall, this cool gallery. For the first time.
So I come to the opening and I look around and I was like, "Hey, where is it, Juno?" And he's like, "No, no. You're not on the main walls." you're on the door to the bathroom. And that was my little tiptoeing was on the door to the bathroom and it was hung upside down. And I thought that was just the coolest thing. And you know what? Actually, I still think that's the coolest thing ever.
Haiver | 26:46
Man, that icing on the cake of being upside down is perfect.
Mitchell F Chan | 26:51
Yeah. But that was literally like just kind of brute forcing my way into, and I guess we started off talking about hyper local scenes. And I, you know, and I said that I wasn't part of, that I'm not part of one now. And I'm not. But I guess I was then. And actually, it was really awesome.
So actually, thank you for revisiting this part. That was really important to me. And so from there, I could go and, you know, once I'd been in like, you know, like a show at Spin Gallery, you know, the gallery down the street would, you know, they took a leg and said, yeah, okay, you're okay.
Yeah, we'll put you in a couple group shows. Eventually, I got, they would do these like split solo shows, you know, Yeah, I'd get a couple shows. And I did exhibit my paintings on Queen Street West quite a bit when I was young. And it was just like walking up and down the street, gallery to gallery, going to all the stuff and just brute forcing my way into it. That is how it happened. And so actually, yes, having a local scene was very important for me back then.
Haiver | 27:53
It's interesting that you say you got to show your paintings because paintings are not very much of what we looked at during your presentation a few weeks ago. Yeah.
Mitchell F Chan | 28:02
Yeah, but that was it back then. Because that was the only way that I knew how to be an artist, right? I didn't know that artists made like AI trading bots.
I mean, whatever these young people are doing.
Haiver | 28:18
Yeah, it's getting weird out there. It certainly is. Wait, so is this pre-Chicago?
Mitchell F Chan | 28:24
Yeah, this is pre-Chicago. I was doing this kind of stuff in Toronto for like three years before I went to Chicago to get an MFA.
Haiver | 28:35
And then how did that change once, like after... Grad school. - Or after art.
Mitchell F Chan | 28:41
School. Right.
So then after grad school, like, you know, as classic MFA story, obviously doing my MFA is when I quit painting for good. Because, you know, that's when I learned that wasn't real art.
Like, that's when I learned that. This is why you go like, basically, you do an MFA. To learn that painting isn't real art. That's the only thing I see.
Haiver | 29:07
But that's the only thing I see when I go to art fairs. It's like they're not showing the weird stuff. They're showing the...
Mitchell F Chan | 29:15
I know. It's almost like there's a big disconnect between the art world as it is theorized at art school and the art world as it is practiced out in the world. It's almost like those two visions of art don't line up.
Anyway, yeah, but then after that, but like I will say like, I really, you know, the painting period, I mean, man, I was like, I guess it wasn't really very long. Like, it didn't last very long.
I mean, it was hugely important to me in my life because I was, you know, because, yeah, because I was walking up and down Queen Street West and slinging them all over the place for a couple years. But it was, I mean, I wasn't quite that dumb.
Like, within, like, a year and a half or two years, I had started learning about new media techniques. I started learning electronics and coding and I was, you know, in robotics and things like that. I kind of did get it in my head. Again just from being around that art scene long enough to learn yeah, okay, actually it's not just painting. Art isn't just painting. And so then, yeah, I went to MFA, like, and so I started to get more into installation because that dovetailed nicely with my earlier education in architecture. I was focused on that mostly in MFA.
And then I come out of MFA, and even in that short amount of time, while I was away in Chicago, a lot of the galleries in Toronto had moved. The scene, the community was a little bit less It was a little bit less centralized. And I had found... A And I found a kind of commercial avenue that I could fit into, which was doing these public sculptures and just working on big installation projects.
Haiver | 31:11
I'm curious as you Found galleries after that, which maybe is the next step to talk about how making work changed when you moved from pitching public art installations to persuading curators to show the work you were then doing.
Mitchell F Chan | 31:28
Right, so let's talk about the different ways that I might be.. That I might have been interacting with different types of people who call themselves curators. And I don't know. And I say that like with no snark in my voice whatsoever. These are all in the R world. We have all these ill-defined terms. Not everybody who calls himself a curator is doing the same thing. And most of them are doing things that are valuable and important, but they're very different things.
So the curator of you know, in these commercial art galleries, right? Like the one where I'm on the bathroom wall or whatever, right?
I mean, that's a curator. No, man, that's a small business owner, all right?
Like, they're using their sense of taste to decide what products, like, you know, are in their shop and they're, you know, and are going to connect with their audience of collectors, right? And ultimately, and look, man, I got that first show, honestly, probably because I was just like in, like, 22 year old kid walking around and like probably those like gallerists like just like wanted to fuck like it really is what it comes down to like we're kind of hoping that i'd put out And that's fine.
Yeah, for sure. But at that point, these people are just trying to almost literally throwing stuff on the wall and seeing what sticks or throwing stuff on the wall and seeing what sells. All right. The average commercial gallery does not last very long.
That's why they do the group shows to see, all right, who's going to be popular? Who's going to connect? Actually, who has friends who come in and buy art? All of this stuff, that's fine. When I finish, and so that was most of what that scene was. And look, some of those small business owners end up being really important parts of a community. And they end up doing things, starting up initiatives that turn into real movements. A lot of times, important art movements sort of coalesce around those types of people, those types of scenes.
So it's a really cool thing to be a part of. Like there's that crazy, manic, frantic energy. Every three weeks, they're going to be doing something totally different. It was really fun. I come out of art school and now I'm doing installation art. All that is to say, my relationships with those curators was based on they were hoping that my product would make money for them. Directly and that's fine. That's totally cool. That's the game. Coming out of art school, okay, now I'm doing this installation art, which everybody knows is not very profitable. It's not very commercial. You're not going to make a ton of money off of it. But I'm coming back to Toronto, I've got this, you know, School of the Art Institute of Chicago label next to my name, which, you know, especially in Canada, like fancy, expensive American school. Boy, this kid is-- watch out for this kid, right? Now, at this point, I started showing with a different gallery in Toronto called Angel Gallery, owned by this guy named Jamie Angel, and who was a little bit more successful than the galleries that I had been dealing with before I went away to Chicago. Angel Gallery was actually the first place where I saw my God. Whatever.
Anyway, I saw some great artists. An angel, and through their gallery. And so, and he would let me do, he had, first of all, he had more staff. This wasn't like a little mom and pop shop. He, you know, he had a couple of the gallery girls with the gallery girl bangs. And he had like a director who is doing more of a curatorial role. And that director, they put me in the front room, the project room. And I was a loss leader. And I knew that I was a loss leader. But if you're doing challenging, cutting edge work that doesn't come in a very commercial form, which all of you doing digital virtual art world, like forget our little world and our collectors for a second, most galleries are think this is not a thing they get into for the money.
Still, the oil on canvas is going to outsell, you know, the immaterial digital, you know, whoop-de-whoop, 10 to 1. So I was a lost leader. And the reason why a commercial gallery would put work like mine in the gallery, like, you know, those two cloud sculpture things, right? It's just... And I think I said this in the previous thing, 11 months out of the year, we are going to sell beautiful oil paintings that look amazing in one of your condos.
And then one month of the year, we'll show something really challenging and cutting edge to let you know that it's okay that you bought those really nice oil paintings because you bought them from a place where there is cutting edge, you know, challenging work. And that's fine, right? But I got what I wanted out of it because I got to stay in that cadence. I'd work on something I was passionate about. I get to exhibit to the public, get some feedback, get some praise, get that dopamine hit. I wasn't getting the money. That's okay. And that's okay because I had another job where I made money. And that was a nice cadence. I never sold a single one of those artworks that I made for Angel Gallery between the year like 2011 and 2018.
Haiver | 37:00
Clearly a loss later then.
Mitchell F Chan | 37:03
Yeah. Yeah.
Haiver | 37:06
I'm curious as you're doing that, I mean, you're going to do it for the love of it. You're going to be the artist that you want to be. All that art school training is paying off at that point. What else is going through your head during that period about how you want to figure out how to position yourself as an artist or find your place in the art world?
Mitchell F Chan | 37:27
It's always evolving. And I'm like, and it's actually, it's funny, I would always be kind of frustrated that, you know, because I was doing so many commissions, so much commercial work in my public art practice, I was maybe only getting to produce one fine art exhibition per year, maybe one fine art exhibition every second year or something like that. In retrospect, that was fine. That was probably the rate at which my thinking was evolving. That's probably the rate at which I was really growing as an artist. Making anything more than that, I would have been just pumping out product. And like, to what end?
Like, I'm not pumping out product to meet demand. I'm not pumping out product to make money.
So actually, that was a really good cadence for my career at the time. And of course, I'm not even taking into account all the stuff that I was learning by maintaining my more commercial practice. I'm learning like really important stuff, like how to manage projects and manage budget and manage clients and all this stuff.
So like, you know, it was always like feeling like frustrated about stuff not moving fast enough. But that was like kind of delusional.
Haiver | 38:42
I'm curious what have you found works well in building and maintaining relationships with these curators as you've worked, whether that particular gallery at the time or like Mimi Nguyen-Wahad's gallery right now in New York and London?
Mitchell F Chan | 38:59
Right. So let's fast forward to the present because maybe everybody's sick of my indulgent trips down memory lane. Let's talk about what's going on. Let's talk about what's going on right now.
So right now, I work with two galleries. I work with Wyn Wah Head and I just started working with a gallery based in Hong Kong called Desart. And those people are going to have, once again, different definitions of what a curator does. In the digital art space, in our sort of crypto-centric art space, I think we're still really figuring things out. I don't want to talk about things that I don't know about personally, but I just know that I don't know what...
Like in the handful of other like galleries, I don't know what Heft does, but I think that they don't have exclusive relationships with their artists, right? The deal used to be If you're with an artist or if you're with a gallery, you sell through nobody else. They're going to get 50% of everything. They're going to manage all your relationships with your clients, all that stuff. And obviously, we can't do that now. I have relationships with my own collectors that are independent of a gallery. And I like that. I actually don't find it burdensome at all. That's the part of online relationships that I like the most is talking with people who, wow, are actually so into my art. They're willing to spend money on it. What an amazing privilege to get to those people like wow so awesome And so people are figuring it out. Right now, it's not defined. I'll say that when I decided to work with Win My Head, there were a number of galleries that were starting out. And I really just kind of wanted the best fit of who I would enjoy hanging out with, which sounds like a dumb reason to enter into a business relationship, but I don't think it is. And so that was nice. And we don't have a business relationship that is as prescriptive or confining as those rad art relationships that we've talked about. And I think we all just kind of have the idea that we will... Just kind of figure things out as we go along. What should I, and ideally that gallery is handling a lot of sales for me. Here's the thing that I would do is I would just be like, hey, can we make sure that this person and that person knows about like this project that they're coming out and just make sure that they're at the opening and stuff. And she'll do that. And it's in both of our interests that she does that. And we'll figure this out. My other relationship is much more old school. DeSarth in Hong Kong.
I mean, they've been in business for like 30 years. Really...
So I'm still kind of figuring it out. I forced Pascal to talk to whoever else is selling my work. They have an agreement that one person has rights to sell my work in the Asian market and the other person has rights in European and North American markets. How that is going to play out? Where most of our sales happen online. I don't know. We're going to figure it out.
So the main thing I do is just make people have lunch together so that when there's inevitably friction, we have some experience of talking to each other. And yeah, he'll be kind of more old school like that. We'll see. I'm still figuring it out. I think everybody's still kind of figuring it out. All the rules have changed now.
Haiver | 42:57
Yeah, they really have. It's familiar to think about like, all right, even in the US, you might have a dealer in New York and a dealer in LA. But once you move to a certain tier of gallery, it's like, okay, well, we have galleries in multiple cities now. And... But now with everything being so online the way it is and so many sales happening that way, even at the auction houses, right? Most of their sales now come over the phone and the internet, whereas it used to be about the energy in the room. Everyone's trying to is having to figure that out. It is fun to show up in an art fair, though, and have your work in more than one booth sometimes and just be like, this person is ubiquitous. I am seeing them everywhere. That must mean that they are important and therefore I should start paying attention. If your name's not already familiar.
Mitchell F Chan | 43:44
Yeah. That is how it works a lot of the time.
Haiver | 43:49
So one of the students asked, Who is the viewer you're making art for? Like, do you have someone in your mind or like an archetype or an image? And they asked, have you ever met them? This ideal viewer.
Mitchell F Chan | 44:09
Yeah, there is an ideal viewer. Most of the time for the last few years, in my head, I'm always making my art. For this guy named Dave. All right. Most of the time in my head, I'm making art for Dave.
Haiver | 44:23
You're not jerking my chain. This is real.
Mitchell F Chan | 44:26
Yeah.
Haiver | 44:27
Okay. Yeah. For.
Mitchell F Chan | 44:28
Real. Dave was, Dave was one of the first collectors that I met in NFTs. And it really is one of the reasons why I stuck around. He lives...
Like, some... He is not somebody who went to art school. But he is infinitely curious. He would, when he discovered digital zones, he read the blue paper, like front to back. He had intelligent things to say about it. And that was my first experience. I don't want to say my first exposure, but that was a major exposure to me of this category of person existed who was like, Yeah, didn't have a formal art background, but like, They're smart, they're curious all the time, and they'll listen to what you have to say about art if you just don't treat them like an idiot, which unfortunately art does a lot of the time. And so this is a person, right? And so, yeah, Dave has a sense of humor...
Like, we'll read things and follow up on things. And I just, that's kind of like the person that I have in mind the most when I've been making most of the artworks that I make. I was like, Dave, like, I'm like, would Dave think this is cool? And, you know, in reality, really, there's like a table in my head of different people that I talk to.
Like, there are different moments for I... The committee in my head consists of various different friends.
You know, whose voices I hear, I might be like working on something and I'll just be like man, what is like, what's, what would Nancy Baker Cahill think about this? What would she do? She's on my committee in my head. But most of the time, and so there's a whole bunch of people like that, but most of the time, the default is it reverts to Dave.
And it's not, and I should say, it's not like I'm making this for them because you're following your own interests, right? You're thinking, how would this land with them? Would they get this? Would they think this is funny? Would they think this is smart?
Haiver | 47:01
Yeah. I mean, another question we got from one of the students was one of your stands in front of your work without any explanation or wall text, which is something a lot of galleries don't have. You walk in, it's just the white wall. Yeah. How do you make sure the work is doing its job? Right. It's a really big act of faith in a lot of ways to put it in a gallery setting and trust or hope that a viewer gets it. And I really appreciate that you don't want to treat people as dumb in doing that.
So I'm curious, How do you approach that?
Mitchell F Chan | 47:31
So, I mean, that is one of my biggest things. People have different attitudes about this, and there's no need to be prescriptive about it because it is okay. That there is some art. That requires the viewer to do a lot of preparation for to see. That is totally okay. There is room in this world for art that is like that, and the world is a better place for having some but not all art like that, right? And, but I think I default to, and this all comes from my background in public art, where it was, that was the whole job. The job is that 99% 0.9% of the people who are going to see this sculpture are just there to catch the bus.
You know, like they're not, they did not read the essay in the Brooklyn Rail and then think, I got to come down to the corner of Dufferin and College Street and see this. And so that is where like I get the idea to, it's not like I get the idea because I invented this, but that's where I got this ethos instilled into me, drilled into me to work in layers. And you see it on the thing behind me, right? This is the thing that I'm working on right now. It has to be, this surface layer has to be interesting, it has to be engaging, it has to invite people in. And I don't care if people get it wrong. On the first view or the second view or whatever. What's more important to me is that they feel comfortable enough coming back again and again or sticking with it long enough to get it right eventually or not. And so it is like you asked, how do you deal with that?
I mean, and to me, that's just, that's the whole, that's, it's, Not the whole job, but it's a big... Art. Of the job. Different strategies for it all the time. And it usually starts with allowing a person to feel some sense of comfort, familiarity They know what this is. Even if I'm about to pull the rug from them, and it's not going to be what they are, what it is, let them start with that feeling. I don't like... Just challenging someone right off the bat. It's cheap. It's lazy in a lot of ways. And a lot of times it's just posturing.
So that's the job as far as I'm concerned.
Haiver | 50:17
Yeah, which sometimes I would sum up as like, don't be an asshole to your viewer.
Mitchell F Chan | 50:23
Yeah. And, you know what, and there is a difference between, yeah, art that requires a lot of preparation and where, like, you have to have read a whole bunch of books or whatever before to get this. And I do think that's okay.
And then the art that is just, like.....
And then there's art that is just like, where you walk in and it's like, "Dildo! Jesus Christ!" And it's like... Right, you know, but this art was like really about colonial structures. And it's just like, you're just so... No. That's what I don't like to do.
Haiver | 51:05
Yeah. I love this idea of starting with the first impression. It doesn't have to be right, but it gives people an entry point at least that's accessible.
Like Xantar, you're like, this is a game. It's familiar. I can get it. I can start here and be with it.
And then it turns out to not, like you do pull out the rug a little bit, but you pull it very slowly just as that camera zooming in or out does in the piece you referenced. Yeah. It's interesting, though, that you say first impressions are okay to be wrong.
So with our students in our cohort feedback sessions, we don't let the artist explain the meaning of the work for the first half of the feedback session. And so the artists are hearing first impressions, essentially. And this is Like helps them define, do I want to leave it with a first impression that's wrong? What do I need to correct about that intention? I'm curious how you workshop these things in your own work.
Mitchell F Chan | 52:01
How I workshop the first impression.
Haiver | 52:05
Yeah, or not just that. Like within the, like you're starting, like you, your work often has a central idea that you're exploring.
Like where do you start? When you're building that out as you figure out the many components. But it has to start somewhere.
And then the viewer's starting point is that first impression. But...
Mitchell F Chan | 52:28
Right. And it's just painting, like, sometimes it's literally just painting a scene.
Like, any scene that you want, just paint it as, like, and as captivating and engaging a way as... As possible and just like really basically you know you can almost just like bob ross your way through that first layer of what something is and i try to do this all the time like even in My very first video game, Winslow Homer's Croquet Challenge, the very first frame of that, like once you click start, it's like 3D models in the exact pose and the exact composition of the Winslow Homer painting. Now, I'm using a big crutch there.
Like I know that the original painting works, is a good painting. I guess. I don't know. That history book said it was, so I guess it is. And if I just make kind of digital version, I get a good painting. And it's like, and it's okay to me. It's absolutely okay that this artwork opens on the most basic art brain-dead thing that you could do as a digital artist. That's even funny to me. How much bad art is literally like the Mona Lisa, but I made it with AI. It's like the Starry Night, but I made it with code. That's the origin of so much bad digital art. But it's like at least somebody knows what it is.
So was I like no, I got to like really let the person know there's a complexity here. We're going to go different places. Dude, you do not.
Like, you just... You don't need to whip it out on the first date.
Like you don't, like just be comfortable, familiar at first, you know?
Haiver | 54:24
I was curious about that Winslow Homer piece. It was your first video game. There was nothing. There were no games before that.
Mitchell F Chan | 54:31
I did a little demo. I was telling you before we got... And I dropped the link actually in here, like just to test out the video. But I always just considered that like a tech demo. That was literally me just learning Unity in real time that I made that car salesman demo. But that Winslow Homer thing, it was the first thing that I called an artwork and that I considered a completed artwork.
Haiver | 54:50
And that was a commission with the Buffalo AKG with curator Tina Rivers. Ryan, how did that come about when you didn't have a lot of... You had it demonstrated a lot in games. That seems like a bold choice for a curator to make. Right.
Mitchell F Chan | 55:06
Because when you, because listen, when you have, when you. When you got them by the balls, all right, you squeeze, okay?
Like, they were, no, it's just, they wanted it, like, they wanted a commission. There was a tight deadline. They weren't going to be able to push back on stuff.
So that was my chance, right? But just having... Having a good relationship, really, with the person. We'll come back to the curator, like that curator.
You know, one of the things, one of the best things that I do is I look at what other curators are doing. And not just for myself, but because I'm genuinely interested and I have questions about what they're programming and why they're programming it. And your best relationships will always be the ones that are real, where you actually have real interests And sometimes those interests are professional and artistic.
Sometimes they're just personal, like, as well. And so, you know, I did have a really good relationship, like, with Tina, where she, I think she trusted me to get the thing done. But there wouldn't have been time to tell me no anyway.
Haiver | 56:27
So. I mean, what was the original pitch? What did she sign off on, or what did the museum say? Committee or board sign off on it? No, the original.
Mitchell F Chan | 56:34
Pitch was I just said, I'm going to make a video game based on Winslow Homer. And you kind of got to like... You kind of got to just keep your mouth shut a little bit In a sense, it's not like, yeah, and there will be a soundtrack and there will be dialogue branches and there will be unique voiceover clips and all that. Just keep to yourself. And they might think it's just a simple browser game. JavaScript, whatever, you know, yeah.
Haiver | 57:04
Yeah, keep it simple. Don't give them a reason to fear that you're not going to finish it on time or that this is way outside the scope of what you've done before. What pieces had she seen that got her interested? Or how did you guys first connect?
Mitchell F Chan | 57:15
I think she'd seen Digital Zone. That was how I met a lot of people in the art world, right? Is that during that NFT explosion, like art world people who needed to find some kind of art historical framework upon which to hang an understanding of NFTs and cryptocurrency, like that was the project for them. And that was, you know, the real benefit of that. I think there were a lot of people, there were a handful of people who independently came to the idea of what we now call NFTs or who prototyped early versions of NFTs independently of each other. And obviously Kevin McCoy and Rhea Myers did that a few years before me. But when I arrived at that idea, I was doing so like really specifically through the lens of art history, through the lens of trying to recreate a system of financialization, right, that only existed in the art world, as far as I knew.
So there was, for a number of, you know, for a number of art world people, like even more than like quantum or crypto punks, which were things like that happened that pioneered technology. But this was one thing that had happened before all the money that really you could hang a kind of curatorial thesis on, like, you could hang an essay on that idea of ownership and financializing ideas and financializing material or whatever.
So she was really aware of that piece. And then she was aware of the Sol LeWitt piece that I'd done through art blocks. And I think those were the main ones that she was familiar with.
Haiver | 59:11
I love that you've been connecting many of your works at this transition point to various art historical figures. I'm curious where that came from first for you, what you saw as the value of it or what it meant to dialogue with art history for you.
Mitchell F Chan | 59:30
Yeah, so it's really tough. There's a reason why I don't do it anymore or I try not to do it anymore. And it's actually the reason why I try not to do it anymore is not because it's tough, but because it can be very easy. I think there's... A natural benefit to when something is new, you have to compare it to something that is old to begin to create an understanding of what this thing is and what this thing is not. And when you can construct an unlikely pairing of things, that's really helpful. At the time of Cryptocurrency, Yves Klein, like this was the best way for me to understand those things.
Like Yves Klein was the best way for me to understand cryptocurrency. And it was the best way for me to explain cryptocurrency to people in the art world who I thought were my audience. And it was like, that was a genuine, sincere kind of thing to do. When I did the Sol LeWitt thing, and that was like... The Sol LeWitt thing I did in Art Blocks was actually a reproduction of an artwork that I had made years before. In 2013, I made my first Sol LeWitt code thing. In retrospect, I mean, that was a completely obvious thing to do. The idea of Sol LeWitt being an analog, a way for understanding algorithmic art.
I mean, now it's like a no duh. And maybe even in 2013, it was a no duh, but... Maybe I was just, duh. And so that's why I felt like I had to do it. But I did it back then. And it is helpful. It is genuinely helpful because that led me to a place of...
Later on, when I was teaching art and code at OCAD University here in Toronto, Students would hate this. I would, the first day, I'd show them the book Grapefruit by Yoko Ono. And if you don't know Grapefruit by Yoko Ono, it's a book of, and every page is like a set of instructions, almost like a koan.
Like these instructions are less mathematical and algorithmic than Solowitz. Solowitz instructions are like, draw five lines at, you know, 90 degree angles and fill every second one in with like crosshatch, blah. And each page of the book Grapefruit by Yoko Ono is like, you know, like put a drinking cup like on top of your head and then like imagine you will never be thirsty again.
Like it's stuff like that. But it was doing that because I hadn't seen it before. Making that connection between algorithmic art and Sol LeWitt allowed me to get to the place of thinking about ways that algorithmic art could be just like Fluxus poetry. Now, that's a really obvious thing to say, but it was fun for me at the time. And with the conceptual art crypto thing, not a lot of people were making that connection at the time. I wasn't aware of some of the earlier people who were hanging out around Furtherfield and stuff like that and who were hanging around Sam Hart. There were a lot of people who were finding conceptual art frameworks for crypto art back then were really hung up on the art and language movement and They were hung up on that because they were smarter than me And they were more technical.
So what was really interesting to them about? Cryptocurrency these people like Sam Hart Rhea Meyers was cryptography like they understood like the bones of cryptocurrency better than I did. And through art and language, they could find a lot of poetic expression of ideas in cryptography.
So that was kind of their framework. And I just had a more financialized approach But like, yeah, I was more interested in financial concepts.
Haiver | 01:03:48
Yeah. I'm curious. Those early that early piece right ended up going to auction. And selling you've sold at auction more than once I believe if I remember correctly is that something you would recommend for living artists or for young artists like how do you think about the place yeah for sure in this world yeah.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:04:10
Yeah, for sure. Like, don't let anybody tell you that it's dirty.
Like, no, that was like that. Like, that was good. It is frankly, and not saying this is like how the world should work, but like, it's very good to have like your name beside a very big number. That's...
Like, it's... There's...
Yeah, it usually ends up working out well for you. And just know what it is. Those people, they don't care. They don't really care. And the auction house will always be bad at like, especially all the digital All the auctions that have happened in the last five years, they're pretty much like the auctioneers the auction houses aren't good at their job they're not actually getting collectors to come in like they're they don't have a rolodex of people that they're calling up most of the people in this industry right now are pretty bad at their jobs still blows me away five years later they're still pretty bad at their jobs but and so it's you have to way like if you but yeah generally it's nice to have a big number publicized next to your name it will be a collector that you probably could have sold to anyway and not had to pay the 20 25 gallery commission or like auction like hammer fee or whatever usually that's usually it ends up being worth it, just kind of for promotion. Then you have a problem of defending the price. This is a thing that's been really interesting to talk to Pascal about. And so yeah, I'll just tell you this. I don't know what any of this means. I'm just telling you straight up that this was the problem. Where like, because Pascal's really old school and he, you know, he spoke to me very bluntly. He's like, you have two auction records on record because people do keep track of that stuff.
Like that stuff gets recorded. And he was like, and so I did one auction for Digital Zones and then I did a charity auction for UNICEF where I sold Web 3 Buddha and that was because the curator Nina Roars asked me to do it. And I didn't know her very well, but I'd heard good things about her and held her in high esteem. And I thought this was a nice thing to do to build a relationship there. And you know, it was a good cause or whatever. And so that piece sold for... I don't know, like... Maybe like $18,000 or something like that. And Pascal says to me, there are two numbers next to your name in the records. One is very big for like a million dollars and one's for $18,000.
So it looks like your first number is fake. And we need to like, and so people won't know what to do with that. It's making it really hard for me to justify you know, $100,000 price tag next to one of your pieces, right? Or something like that.
So we do need to slowly build up a record that looks real. That's an opinion that's coming from the very traditional art world, which maybe people don't want to participate in. I don't know what to do about any of that. And like, I'm not complaining about it, but hey man, like that's a little bit of insight that I got into that world.
Haiver | 01:07:33
Yeah, and I think it's a little different for artists who've worked in the blockchain Web3 world as well because they're already dealing with a public ledger that says, "Here's all the prices over time. Here's my sales record." And that's, again, very different from the physical brick and mortar gallery world where you do a handshake, you give some collectors a 10% discount and others you don't. Especially in that world where prices might go up if you sell a you know edition of five the price goes up per edition not Yeah, right, which is not at all how it works online in a lot of cases. I.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:08:09
Yeah. And so, yeah. And so, but I am saying there is a ledger out there in that world.
Someone is paying attention, even if it's not publicly accessible. But these are all like, you know, it's like when people are like, should I work with the auction house? Man, these are like, they're champagne problems.
Like you'd rather have them. You'd rather have to justify why a piece sold for too much money than have to explain, you know, like... Explain to your wife, like, why you have to sell your car. Right.
Haiver | 01:08:48
Come I'm curious about the, so this work showed during the Venice Biennale two years ago when we were there together.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:08:49
On, man. You're going to have problems.
Haiver | 01:08:59
It was part of a show that was adjacent to the Biennale. I believe it was the Prada Foundation had put that together. And can you talk about the experience of being a part of that? I don't even want to call it a group show because it was more of an immersive experience for those who, I have no idea what we're talking about. It was sort of like wandering into a thrift store, except there were very glitzy pieces throughout. It was a massive multi-floor space in an old Venetian building and tucked in there were some very famous works of art next to some very contemporary art next to Drift store items. But I'd love to hear the inside of what that experience was like.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:09:43
Like, I mean, do you want to know what it was like being there or how it came about or?
Haiver | 01:09:50
Like the brass tacks of like sending work, installing work, situating yourself within this very large space, which is very complicated. And then like, is anything even for sale in that space?
Like there's lots of things I.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:10:04
Don't think people know. I love telling the story, but I'll be honest with you, there's very little to be learned from that. Because it was completely Yeah, it was completely surreal. Because the way that came about, it was like, it wasn't...
So to give people some background, this was an exhibition that was running concurrent to the 60th Venice Biennale. And it was hosted by Fondazione Prada. And it was an exhibition by, like, the artist of the exhibition was the Swiss conceptual artist Christophe Buchel. People pronounce it differently. The way that came about...
Like And this is why I feel bad in the context of this class. There's nothing to be learned. I didn't, like, there's no hustle for it.
Like, I didn't ask a friend to be connected to this curator. I didn't have any connections to it. I was, this was the craziest thing. I was on a plane. And I was actually about, I was on a flight to Milan and where I was actually meeting up with some other crypto collectors. As I'm about to put my, into airplane mode, I got an email from It says it's from Fondazione Prada. And they said, "We're putting out this exhibition. We'd like one of your pieces in the exhibition." And I honestly thought it was, I thought that this was a phishing scam or something like that.
You know, Fondazione Prada, I mean, it's one of the most prestigious and well-resourced art foundations. In the world. And I was like, but I was literally, I got to pull this power move. I got to post power move. I said, I can be in your office in 24 hours. Okay. Because I was on a plane to Milan anyway. Okay. I was on a plane to Milan and they're like, right. And yeah. Okay.
So anyway, but then the truth is the way that came about is they, We don't have a single shared contact on LinkedIn, or Twitter, or Discord, or any of that. This artist, Christoph Buchholz, is a weirdo and a hermit. Nobody knows, like, people don't even know what he looks like.
Like, people don't know if he even showed up to his own exhibition. He doesn't give interviews or anything like that. And he had this idea, he wanted to do this exhibition about the history of debt and religion and art. And I learned that he was assembling This. And a massive catalog of artifacts that you know, dealt with those themes and that he thought my artwork was one of them. And I was like, I mean, I couldn't believe it. I got to Milan and they said like, yeah, so they gave me more information. They were like, so this actually, it's not for the museum here in Milan. It's going to be for the Venice Biennale. And I was like, holy shit. And they were like, so we think we need Christophe. He would really like to have Marcel Duchamp's Monte Carlo Bond. He'd like to have Yves Klein's piece. He'd like to have, you know, he'd like, and he'd like to have your piece. And I'm like, what the fuck? And I still am convinced I'm getting trolled or whatever, but I'm like, that's cool. I told nobody about it for like really, until the exhibition was over, because I kept on thinking that it was not going to happen or a rug pull. In terms of preparing for it, there was nothing to prepare for.
So the way that exhibition worked was, All the, there were. Hundreds of artifacts in there. They're right, like Duchamp, Klein, Warhol, Joseph Beuys. There's a goddamn Titian in there. And they were all just treated like crap. The Titian was hanging on an old piece of pegboard so that it looked like an antique roadshow thing. I love my, one of my favorite pieces was they got all of this stuff from the Andy Warhol Foundation in Pittsburgh, like all of these biographical documents, things that were important to him personally, but they just left it in the cardboard box it was shipped in. They never opened it, so it was just a cardboard box. Jeez. They had, you know, you know, like the, in thrift shops, there'll be like these container of... They'll have this glass display and they'll be like, old coins, you buy an old American Indian head copper penny or whatever, but they're usually just crap, right? And the curator goes, that coin was minted in Pompeii. That's one of the few coins I can find from Pompeii. And it's all treated like shit, and my art was too, but because of that, they were super secretive during the application process, right? And so they just sent a document and they were just very curt. They would not respond to any of my emails. All right, like, they didn't even respond to my email if I asked if I was invited to the opening. I didn't know if I was invited to the opening. And actually, I technically wasn't. All right. It was just fill out this legal document so we can show the thing. I got one email from the person. They're like, how do you want this set up? Is this a book? Is it a paper? Is it a thing? I was like, well, I want you to have a hardware wallet. I want you to have a hardware wallet and maybe show the paper on an iPad. I think that'd be cool. Didn't hear from them ever again. All right. I don't get, I had no say in how it was presented. And once I got there, I realized it's because like, they loaned that Titian from the Uffizi gallery. And do you think they told them? That they were going to hang it on pegboard. I am willing to bet you they did not. And like, apparently like the Andy Warhol foundation was like, that they were handling the artifacts like this, right? And so it was completely unique. There's nothing to be learned from that. And I would never allow anybody to treat me like that ever again unless they were creating the greatest exhibition I've ever seen in my life, which is what that ended up being.
So that's what it is.
Haiver | 01:16:21
Yeah. Yeah. It was a wild trip to see art treated that way and to... .
Mitchell F Chan | 01:16:50
Yeah, I would.
Haiver | 01:16:53
What are some of the games that have been most meaningful to you?
Mitchell F Chan | 01:16:57
Okay, so be honest. Right now, I'm playing Slay the Spire 2. I'm playing it a lot, and a lot of times I kind of hate it. It's the kind of game that I will hate myself for playing because I stopped learning anything from that game a long time ago, like many runs. It's been many runs since I could claim that this was somehow research. But I like it because I like to learn the dopamine systems and stuff and how they do all those things because these are all skills that helped me build that first layer in my art. Obviously, I'll never make a game that is as good as a game as Slay the Spire 2 or Doom, which is probably my favorite franchise, right? But, you know, I can make like some kind of cruddy approximations of them to make that kind of first layer of my artwork and understand a little bit why they feel good. I can't make anything that feels that good, but I can apply some design principles to make my own art feel good. The games that I am, you know, like the games that I just, that I feel really strongly about are like Kentucky Route Zero is one of the great artworks created in my lifetime. Disco Elysium? - Yeah. - Like Disco Elysium is, it's one of the only, pieces of writing, whether that's in paper format or whatever, that makes me laugh out loud so much.
Like, it is wickedly funny. It is so poignant.
Like, it is so smart. And it's awesome that it is in that package.
So I love that. I love Sayonara Wild Hearts. By Samogo. That's just a beautiful game. And just, once again, just doing, like, it's just doing something that's kind of new, that like audio visual, like kind of interactive pop album thing. My gosh, like, That's awesome. That's what I want software art to be. And there's so many of these things that are just doing They're just doing. Art things. And we don't call them art, but I don't care. I call them art and I get as much out of them as I get out of, you know, a trip to the museum.
Haiver | 01:19:28
Yeah. Yeah. I remember playing through Grand Theft Auto 5 for the first time and being like, this is a 60-hour story that is the same length as all five seasons of The Wire. This is, I think, as good as The Wire in the arc of the story that it tells.
So I have this memory of you once telling me that you didn't finish a lot of games. Like, obviously, these games you love, you finish. But I was... Why... Why is that? Why start a lot of things that you don't get to do yet?
Mitchell F Chan | 01:19:58
Man. Because most games aren't that good.
Like, most art isn't that good. Like, it's not where... And you don't... It's not even like if you're reading a bad book or watching a bad movie, but you want to see how it ends.
Like, they don't, like... Don't spend any more time with bad art than you need to.
Like, there's no ending. Like, it's not going to do anything, you know?
Like... - Yeah. - And like a lot of these games, right? And so, you know, most games like don't emphasize the story that much.
So they might have an ending, but I don't really care. No, most of the time, I probably buy one or two new games a week on Steam. And I am not going to put the 60 hours into all of them. I'm going to figure out what's new. Okay, what's making this game tick? All right, is it something interesting? Usually not. And so then I'm done and it's fun.
Haiver | 01:20:58
Yeah, I mean, you're I'm sure, learning about mechanics and what works and control mechanisms.
So a lot of other things that play into your.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:21:07
Art in the process. Yeah, like stealing tons of ideas.
I mean, think about it, right? Like the opening of Xantar can happen because, you know, because I wasted a whole bunch of time playing Vampire Survivors, right? Vampire Survivors is like not an artwork, but hey, I learned about, you know, but I learned it had a really good idea for a control interface that I just stole.
Haiver | 01:21:28
That dovetails really nicely with a question we got from one of our students, which is, what do you see as the difference between a video game and art? And where do you think the line is for when something is pushed into being art?
Mitchell F Chan | 01:21:41
Sure. And I've spoken about this before. The answer is not...
Well, when something is so good, it's art. We make this mistake all the time.
Something is so good that it's art. Art is not a term that means something in its class that is really good. We can have different definitions of what art is, but I don't want it to be that.
Like man, it's just like that Porsche 911 is art because it's the best car, you know, made with the most crap. And so to me, of course, I said that I wrote an essay... For Outland, it was called How Art Games Work. We've got to get that thing published again. And what I said is the difference is that, An artwork, I think, carves out a little perch where you can look back on the system of the game and it presents itself. For you. And That is one... One way, I think, to go from a video game to being art, like every video game is a system, but an artwork, I think, exists primarily to... Not use a system to distract you. And that's what games are. That's a pastime, right? Mario is a system. And it's an excellent pastime. It's better designed and better executed, more masterfully crafted than 99% of the art that has ever existed. But like, it's... It's a hobby, it's a passion, it distracts you from other things, it's a nice escape, right?
And then artwork educates you and ideally helps connect you to something that is real in this world, right? And... And so that's, yeah, I think that's a useful definition.
Haiver | 01:23:35
Yeah. That dovetails really nicely with some of the things the students have been learning. I was struck by your point that not every artist needs to have the perfect take on every new technology. That comes along and I'm curious how you decide when a subject is truly like yours to speak on and maybe that Again, dovetails with, you said a couple weeks ago, right? You have like the one idea when you're making video games and you've been kind of exploring that in different ways.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:24:09
Yeah, it's just like whatever is kind of coming to you and being of interest to you, like honestly and absent any other kind of like incentives. Like right now, it's just like, it's easy to like think you have a take on AI. There is a huge incentive to have a take on AI, which is everybody who has a take on AI, it looks like is getting an exhibition somewhere. But do I really have a take on AI? I do not. Not one that is any different from anyone else.
So one of the things that is nice is like what patterns do you start seeing everywhere, right? We were talking a little bit before we started off about, you know, the beginnings of ideas for artworks. And I was saying like, When it comes to the beginnings of ideas for artworks, like how Xantar really started from that one line in Wayne's World. There's one line in Wayne's World where Noah Vanderhoef explains one of the fictional games in his arcade. And I just thought it was funny, stuck with me obviously for a long time. And that was a good place to start an artwork. Why? Because one, it's not too vague. It's very specific. It's probably unclaimed territory. Probably not a lot of other artists who are making artwork inspired by that particular line from Wayne's World. They might be making artwork inspired by different lines in the film Wayne's World. But... What are the ideas in your game? But I hear it like, if I hear that's a stupid line. It's so stupid. It's a stupid thing to make an artwork out of. When I played it back in my head enough, like, what I heard was a metaphor for the exploitation of labor that is disguised as a game. Now, if that's what I'm hearing when I read the script to Wayne's World... That's probably an idea that is actually like inside me. It's probably an idea that I've internalized to a degree that I can make art about it.
So whatever you're misinterpreting, like or over-interpreting, whatever flavor your own misinterpretation or over-interpretation takes. That's usually an indication that this is an idea that's really with you. Actually, another way that a lot of my artwork starts with me misunderstanding another artwork, like, someone will describe something.
You know, people do this all the time. It's kind of annoying. And they're like, have you ever seen like so-and-so's artwork? It's like a whole bunch of like books, but like the books instead of like being filled with letters, they're like filled with like pictures of leaves and blah. And like, here's like, yeah.
And then I start to construct my picture of what that is in my head. And then I'll look up what the actual artwork was. And it's something totally different. But I'll usually then like, the idea I had in my head is a good art. I'm going to make that one instead. And it just passes some kind of subliminal test of like, again, if that was where your mind went to, With that, that's probably something you should get that out, right?
Haiver | 01:27:32
Yeah. Completely. It's...
I mean, the games you're making work in this, like opera or movie, right? They have many video games are medium that requires lots of departments to make. You're making these things largely by yourself. And I'm curious about-- I can't remember if you alluded a few weeks ago to like, not having brought on assistance for a particular reason or not, but how do you make sure you're not biting off more than you can chew? When does an idea get too big? Do you have any advice for students around that? Their own big ideas.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:28:11
You just kind of have to be, man, you just kind of have to be honest with yourself. And it takes a long time to learn how to do that, I think when I was younger, you know, I'd have the idea that everything was going to be like a Wagnerian magnum opus. That was the idea you had in your head.
And then inevitably, like, it would never even get started. Like, it would never even get started, you know?
Yeah. And then like you get right, you know, and then I got older and figured out what I could do and just started to take joy in the little steps.
Like the little steps are like really satisfying to me. You know how, you know that feeling of like, you know, you do a little bit and you're frustrated because your idea is so big and you're just taking this one small step and all you feel is frustration. But And it's why I say the enjoyment of this career, of this job, it is the cadence. It's going back and forth in big picture and little small victories and just enjoying what your brain is doing every single day. But I do like, you know, like I start a lot of my projects to like from a practical point of view, I like I start them with tutorials, like and I do the tutorial, I do the fluid simulation tutorial or I do the like program your own like character controller tutorial. And I like learn, I enjoy that I spent, okay, I spent the last eight minutes coding and now like my little guy moves forward when I press the forward key. That's really cool.
And then you just kind of get a sense for what you can take on. And I know it's especially useful advice because now everyone will tell you like, well, you can do anything, be the most ambitious you possibly can because you have vibe coding and the vibe coding will do it all for you. Give it a try.
Like absolutely do it. Nothing that I say should ever be construed as curb your ambition or anything like that. But just understand that like the rescaling of these things are not, failures at all. It's understanding, like it's just, it's understanding your tools and like great artwork is made when there's this perfect harmony between like the tools and the vision.
Haiver | 01:30:25
That's a really great way to think about it. We're about out of time, so I'm going to ask a couple more questions here that we like to conclude every session with in these interviews. One is, what's one sentence of advice you wish you had heard earlier in your career?
Mitchell F Chan | 01:30:44
One sentence. Of advice. It would be Success isn't what you think it is.
It doesn't look the way that you think it's going to look.
Haiver | 01:31:16
- Completely. And finally, what's something you're excited about in contemporary art right now?
Like if I open my like art net or something, I can see a lot of like doom and gloom, like And what's something you're excited about that maybe students might not be paying attention to.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:31:35
Right. Some things that I've been really excited about in contemporary art. Right now? I am... I'm. I'm Genuinely pretty excited about some of these new space is opening up.
Like I'm genuinely pretty excited about Node Foundation opening up in New York, who seem to be like, they're talking the talk, we'll see if they walk the walk, about a different type of art experience. And like an art experience that prioritizes the comfort of the viewer, that tries to create- Repeat slow engagement with art, I think if that can be a success, it will be a really valuable case study for the type of art engagements that I've wanted to see more of for a long time. I am very excited about...
So I don't want to feed into the doom and gloom, but I'm frankly kind of excited about the doom and gloom. I think... I'm quite happy that there is a reckoning that the art world is very much in the middle of. I think some of the ways that it would conflate political values with artistic value. And some of the ways that, I think like, Craft. And execution had been de-emphasized in the last 15 years of visual art in favor of signaling and intent. And I think those I'm saying way too much for the final sentence. But I am excited that I think some of the art of the last 15 years and the ways that we approached artistic value and what an artwork should be are being rethought. And I think they're being rethought very quietly because I think a lot of people are very sheepish about how that went down and what the end result of that was. But it's happening quietly and I think it's important and healthy.
Haiver | 01:34:07
Yeah, it raises really interesting questions for whether art schools will have similar reckonings, return to skill, craft, right, training, you know, the hand up to the wrist, if you will, and virtuosity and getting back to that. One of the big NEA grants to come out recently was for like a school here in Brooklyn that trained specifically in classical art because that's what the U.S. Administration is into.
Yeah.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:34:34
Yeah, man. Like sign me up for chisels and stone blocks. One
Haiver | 01:34:42
One. My goodness.
Yeah, sounds incredible. Mitchell, thank you so much for being here this quarter with us and for your enthusiasm for art and the strange ways that it can take form and manifest in the world. It's really exciting to hear how you think and approach the work.
Mitchell F Chan | 01:35:00
Thank you so much for having me. This is like an absolute delight. Everybody here, please, yeah, reach out, say hello. I'm around. I'm just kind of sitting here and it's nice to hear from people.
Haiver | 01:35:13
So like Mitchell said, we build community online by reaching out. He said that at the beginning and kind of close with that, which I really love. Thank you again to all of you for a wonderful quarter. We have two weeks off and then I will see you in early April.
So have a good one all. Cheers.