Haiver | 00:00
Hi, art friends. Welcome back for another great discussion today.
So this quarter, both of our visiting artists and residents worked with motion pictures and one with video and the other with video games. And they both deal in narrative elements, set dressing, mise-en-scene, camera angles, lighting.
So it seemed like the perfect time to bring in Alyssa Wilkinson for a conversation with our program. Alyssa Wilkinson is one of two full-time film critics at the New York Times, and we happen to be married for almost 20 years now.
So... I know her quite well and I'm very excited for this conversation. Before the New York Times, she was previously a senior correspondent and critic at Vox for seven years, author of three books, including Salty: Lessons on Eating, Drinking, and Living from Revolutionary Women, and her most recent book, We Tell Ourselves Stories: Joan Didion and the American Dream Machine, which came out a year ago and comes out in paperback in June. She served on juries at the Sundance Film Festival, Doc NYC, Sheffield Doc Fest, the Hamptons International Film Festival. She's an adjunct professor in the XE, Experimental Humanities and Social Engagement Program at NYU. She has an MFA in creative nonfiction from Seattle Pacific University, an MA in humanities and social thought from NYU, and a BS in information technology from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. , Her list of contributions is long and impressive. She's contributed essays, features, and criticism to a variety of other publications, including Rolling Stone, Vulture, Bon Appetit, Eater, Pacific Standard, the Dallas Morning News, the Washington Post, the Atlantic, and the Los Angeles Review of Books, among others. And she's appeared on things like MSNBC's Morning Joe, CBS News, CNN International, BBC America, and PBS NewsHour, The New York Times' great podcast, The Daily, and multiple NPR shows, including Morning Edition, All Things Considered, On Point, and 1A.
So please welcome Alyssa Wilkinson.
Alissa Wilkinson | 02:13
Hi.
Haiver | 02:15
Thanks so much for being here and doing this.
Alissa Wilkinson | 02:18
Of course. Glad I could.
Haiver | 02:20
So, the Oscar's just finished. How do you feel about the results?
Alissa Wilkinson | 02:25
I felt pretty good about them. They kind of went the way I expected them to.
You know, we start talking about the Oscars in my business in September or sometimes all the way back in May. And we start to kind of build our predictions about what will happen. And this year, we, I think, landed on the predictions of what did actually happen. But overall, it was a pretty good night. And the show went well, too.
So... It was pretty fun to watch, which I don't always say about the Oscars, as you well know.
Haiver | 02:57
I do, often sitting on a couch next to you. Not this year. Sadly, we are in different places. Alyssa's teaching down south right now for a week. But I was excited that the short film category, there was an art historian who won an Oscar this year, which was very fun.
Alissa Wilkinson | 03:13
Yeah, the short films often get short shrift at the Oscars. Because, you know, people don't think of them as like real movies, but there's a real art to making a good short film.
So it's always good to see when people get interested in them, which is pretty much only when they're at the Oscars.
Haiver | 03:32
So do awards matter? This feels, we spend so much time talking about it in the press, they eat up a lot of airtime. They're a reason you end up getting to go on a lot of the talk shows and news segments that you do on radio and television around this time of year. Do they matter? And if so, how?
Alissa Wilkinson | 03:53
Yeah, as I have pretty mixed feelings about awards, I always have. You know, on the one hand, I hate the idea of giving awards to art, because how do you judge, you know, Two things that are kind of unlike one another to be like better than one another. I know that sounds funny coming from a critic, but like how is one first and one is second? That just feels wrong to me. It's not a race. It's not sports. And often awards make people treat art like sports. And I just feel like that's the wrong logic to view art through. But, yeah. I have sort of come around to the Oscars or to other awards because I think that sometimes they can have a curatorial role. They help people to know what they should be looking for. With the Oscars, for instance, The international category is a good example. A lot of times a movie will not actually get distribution, for instance, in the U.S. Or sometimes even at all until it is nominated for an Oscar. And, you know, there's five movies that get nominated for an Oscar. And it is true that a lot of audiences will, those might be the only five international movies they see in a year. But those are often five very good international movies, and so it is a helpful way to curate, you know, what should I see? Same for the documentary category. That's often true. And even when it comes to things like best picture, You know, a lot of people probably saw a lot of those movies. Sinners, for instance, was nominated for Best Picture this year, and that was one of the top ten movies of last year. Box office category, you know, critics-wise and just in general. And it was the most nominated film in Oscar history. But it's still a good way to kind of say this movie was worth your time and it'll sort of go down in history that way. And so awards can kind of do that.
So I've kind of become okay with them existing, even if I hate the horse race part. Kind of thing about them. It is true that awards and the Oscars in particular are treated a little bit like political elections and some of the same shenanigans go on with them. In fact, they actually hire political strategists and sometimes they're like dirty tricks that go on in the background to try to get one thing to win over another. That is... Not great, but... Again, at the end of the day, if it means that We were talking about short films. There are people who will go to a theater and watch a short films program because these are the Oscar nominated shorts. There is no context in which that would happen otherwise.
So, yeah. Yeah, you know. They do matter for that reason. And it is true that in some cases, if you win an Oscar, it means that you will work again. And so it can really matter for artists. Just to say that you will get the chance to work again because you won that award. Obviously, you know, winning an award matters a huge amount to the people who are winning.
Haiver | 07:09
Right. But movies costing as much as they do, requiring as much collaboration as they do, and it being a business at the end of the day, even as it is sometimes gets to be art. You really need that credential or that award to have someone say, okay, people want, this person will make good things, I can bet on them as a financial investment, which is how Hollywood heads are thinking about it.
Alissa Wilkinson | 07:33
Yeah, and you can really see that with the, you know, what we call the, like, below the line people, like the costume design or the production design or the visual effects people. They're incredibly happy to win.
Sometimes it seems like they might be more happy than the actors and the directors because, you know, their craft often goes unrecognized. And so seeing them win, they've just been at this for so long and winning it means that they'll get hired again. This year, the Oscars had a, new category in casting, which is putting together who's in the movie. And we're still figuring out what it even means to win that, but that for them to be recognized for the first time at the Oscars is incredibly meaningful.
Haiver | 08:16
So I know from being married to you that your year is in some ways structured around the Oscars and the awards season overall. Can you describe how That campaign season influences the shape of your year as a film critic?
Alissa Wilkinson | 08:37
Yeah, so I guess we could start with today or yesterday. So yesterday is the... The sort of New Year's Day of my year. It's the, well, I would say around noon yesterday was New Year's Day of my year, which is when we file, which means send in the article that kind of wraps up the year in movies. I write that with my colleague who's the chief film critic at the Times. Once that's published, then the new year has begun. And so now we start talking about new movies. And of course I've already been seeing new movies because the Oscars only cover from January to December of last year.
So I've been seeing movies, you know, that came out this year, obviously. So from now until May, I'm just sort of seeing movies and reviewing them and, in a normal fashion. I turned in a review of Ready or Not 2 yesterday as well, and that's just a movie coming out this week. In May, we... We all go to Cannes. We all go to the Cannes Film Festival, which is in the south of France. That is where a lot of movies that will show up at next year's Oscars start premiering.
So, "A Norah," the winner of last year's Oscars, that's premiered at Cannes. I was at the premiere of that and knew that would be a big one. Movie stars are there. Tom Cruise is often hanging out.
You know, that's a big deal. So we go to the festival. Then we have summer blockbusters. Summer is the season of big... Hollywood movies, often big action movies or superhero movies. Franchise movies, you know, Fast and Furious type stuff. We watched those all summer. Then we get to September and September is when we launch what we call prestige movies or awards movies. And those happen with the Venice Film Festival, Toronto Film Festival, Telluride. Those all happen all at once. It's like a concentrated three week period. I go to a couple of those, but some people just like do the gauntlet. And that is when everybody who's hoping for an Oscar starts to, kind of launch their movies. And so if you ever notice that all of the, like what we call prestige movies seem to come up out between September and December, it's because they're hoping that those movies will stick in the minds of voters. The people who vote for the awards, which are generally people who work in the business, they come out between September and December and Those are like your dramas usually or like your, you know, your kind of serious movies often. One Battle After Another, which won Best Picture, that came out in September of last year. Sinners was an aberration, actually. That one came out in spring of last year, and that one was just... A phenomenon, but that is an unusual thing.
So that happens from September to December. Of course, in sort of In the US, Thanksgiving is at the end of November. From kind of the end of November to the end of December, The holidays pretty much everywhere in the world.
So we get a lot of kind of family movies or franchise movies that are movies people might go to see during the holidays. So an example is like Wicked, movies like that.
And then, you know, at the end of December, movies that are going to qualify for the Oscars have to have been released in the United States. Sometimes they come out later in Europe or in Asia or in other parts of the world, but that's generally how it works.
And then once January hits... There's a noticeable drop off because the presumption is that a lot of people are just going to go start seeing those Oscar movies because of when nominations happen, which is in January. And so often we get a lot of horror films, a lot of low budget films. For instance, one of the earliest movies that I saw in January was The Primate, which was the chimpanzee horror film, which is just, you know, nobody's trying to do anything except have a good time and scream a lot and eat some popcorn. That's great. That's a big part of our movie year. That happens and then, you know, all of this time I am thinking about and writing about the Oscars. And the Oscars generally are in early March, although they move around a little bit. They were a little late this year because of the Winter Olympics and because they air on television currently. It got pushed into mid-March. But starting in 2029, the Oscars will be on YouTube. Which is, nobody knows what to do with that yet. And that will be a new and exciting thing. I don't know what that means for creators of things and people who make stuff for the internet, but we'll see. But yeah, that's the general arc of the year. And it happens like that every single year. And the Oscars kind of feel like election night for people who work in culture reporting. At the New York Times, we have about 80 people working that night, some of whom are at in LA at the awards, some of whom are in New York. I, for instance, am currently in North Carolina just because that's where I am this week.
So we're kind of all over the place. But yeah, it's a big deal. And I often tell people it's very much like being a political reporter on election night, except the stakes are quite a bit lower. And hopefully it's a lot more fun.
Yeah, so that's it in brief. It's very seasonal work. There are a lot of festivals that anchor our schedule. And there are a lot of little things that go on in between, a lot of conversations. The art changes from season to season kind of based on how the awards season is structured. Which makes it very interesting and interesting kind of cyclical.
Haiver | 14:49
Yeah, it definitely feels like there's a rhythm to it, and sometimes I think about... Not having you around as much from September till Oscars.
So I really celebrate on Monday when things reset, essentially. So you listed out Cannes, Venice, Toronto, New York Film Festival as kind of four big ones.
I mean, I think in there would be Sundance and Berlin. Sundance.
Alissa Wilkinson | 15:16
Yes, and we should mention that Sundance in particular, that's for independent filmmakers. Really, it's kind of the premier independent film festival in the world at this point, I think is fair to say. There's sections for U.S., well, U.S. And Yeah, no, I guess it is U.S. Filmmakers and world filmmakers in both documentary and feature. And they have an experimental section called Next. And often that's for films that they kind of don't know what else to do with them. Maybe it's like... A fiction film with documentary elements or vice versa, or maybe, I think increasingly it'll be maybe a film that has AI elements or something like that.
So they do that in the next section. And then at times, and I actually don't know what the status of this is, but Sundance has had a new Frontiers section. And that has been essentially for art makers. And I have seen some really interesting like VR projects in that section.
So Sundance in particular has always been very interested in like what is the next thing that filmmakers and art makers more broadly are working on. They are very interested in short films, art films, like there's just a lot of that stuff. Berlin I have seen a lot of that. I've been there. I've seen a lot of that stuff there. And I should say at, All of the film festivals, increasingly, there are virtual reality and... AI and other kinds of immersive projects. There's whole sidebars for them. CAN has an immersive sidebar now.
So... You know, people can submit projects to that. Venice has an immersive sidebar, Toronto does.
So these are where people who are making VR projects or AI projects can submit their work and be selected and win awards for them, which is super interesting. And sometimes people's work will go to multiple film festivals and be shown there. And as you can imagine, having your Immersive Project Premier at Cannes is interesting and good. And the one other thing that happens at film festivals that a lot of people don't know about is a number of them have markets. And the market is where people bring a project that they want to sell to a distributor or maybe a project they haven't even made, but they want to get it made. And they want to, they take meetings basically with people who are interested in funding projects.
And then sometimes you, it's a match and your project might, you know, get its funding or get distribution. And that's how you, you know, how you get made.
So it can, for instance, there's a huge building where most of the, where there's like 10, theaters in it, but downstairs there's a huge basement. It's like a just a sea of booths. And it's the Marche, which is... The market and that is where a lot of people are selling projects or looking for funding sometimes from countries and sometimes from production companies. And that's a big part of Cannes, that's a big part of Berlin, Toronto is adding a market.
So people who are making interesting stuff are kind of That's often a way that they Get connected.
Haiver | 18:52
Yeah, it's funny. I was thinking back to during the pandemic when a lot of the film festivals went online. It was actually the year I discovered Jen and Kevin McCoy's work, who came as our visiting artists this quarter. And they had a piece in one of the Sundance studios. Sections for VR. It had a VR and an NFT component. And I, of course, turned my nose up at the word NFT and barely looked at it and went and looked at some dance piece instead, despite whatever Timothee Chalamet says about dance right now.
Sorry, I can't help but dig at him. It's I know, buddy.
Alissa Wilkinson | 19:28
Timmy.
Haiver | 19:30
But at Cannes, like our friend Regina Harsanyi, who curates at the Museum of the Moving Image, as well as Christiane Paul, who curates at the Whitney. They both go and advise at the immersive section at Cannes or at Venice. And it's always fun to have them come back and kind of trade notes on who's doing a good job and who's not, who has good curators picking good work and who does not. And it can be very cyclical as people come in and out of those positions, but there's a space within the film world for art, essentially.
Alissa Wilkinson | 20:05
Very much. And a lot of it is because studios and you know, production companies really don't know what to do with a lot of this kind of stuff right now.
You know, Netflix, for instance, which is one of the biggest studios in the world at this point, they still don't quite know how... They know they want to bring some of this interactive or immersive stuff into their world, but they don't know what it's going to look like. And so their scouts are definitely there and they're definitely looking at projects and just trying to envision the future of... Of cinema, really.
So, you know, those projects are really interesting. And if you're around one of those festivals and you can get in, you can't really get into Cannes, but if you can get into one of the other ones, look, you can really kind of see how, you know, Premiere creators are thinking about the future of moving images.
Haiver | 21:00
So if you're a creator, you work with moving images, like you've listed off the big festivals that often tie into the Long Fall Awards campaign. And again, these are campaigns that have PR people and, you know, - Big budgets. - Yeah, big budgets to put behind the campaign itself. Then there's all the other festivals, right?
Somebody in the chat here mentioned a festival, MFIC in Morelia, Mexico. We talked a little bit about Berlin, but Berlin is kind of not in the Oscar campaign track. How should makers think about other festivals, the ones that might be more mid-tier or small tier or more local and its relationship to their need to apply and desire to apply to things and get their work shown.
Alissa Wilkinson | 21:49
Yeah, I mean, I love the mid-tier festivals. I go to a lot of them. I go to a lot of documentary festivals and if you're making work that could conceivably fit within documentary festivals, they're really great to send your work to. They're often looking for really interesting work. Anything in the nonfiction range. And if you're outside the US, often there's a much wider kind of definition of what that could be in the US is a little more strict often about what that means. But those festivals are usually filled with people who are just interested in Like that's all they're there for. They just want to see stuff. And that is often just how you get seen.
Like it's just getting eyeballs on your work. And they often, you know, they're interested in shorts. They're interested in things of like weird lengths and weird sizes. And this often is true of people. Mid-tier and when I say mid-tier I don't mean they're not good they're often incredibly well curated super passionate fans they're usually just a little smaller or maybe they have less funding almost every city has a film festival and almost every major city has a very good film festival if not multiple good film festivals so it's always worth it to submit your work to a film festival I think especially if it's near you and the cost is going to be fairly low to attend. In addition to having your work seen if it's accepted, you get the opportunity to meet people who potentially could become collaborators. You have the opportunity to meet people who might be interested in funding work in the future or who would be interested in talking with you about your hopes and dreams for your own work. Even if you don't see yourself as a filmmaker, I think there's like opportunities to kind of talk about your work in a different context. And every time I go to a mid-tier I discover a filmmaker who I didn't even know existed because their work wasn't at Cannes or wasn't at whatever. And I get really excited about them. There are cases in which I have written about films that I saw at a festival that just got like a blip of a release in New York. But I see it on the calendar and I say, I saw that. I want to make sure people know about it.
You know, you just kind of never know who's there. It's a good way to get your work written about, even if it's just in like a local paper or something, which is, A nice way to know what people think about your work, but it's a nice way to start developing language for yourself to talk about your work. Through someone else's eyes. Film festivals always have, like, Fun parties, coffee hours, things like that. It's just, it's usually a really good, vibe, I would say.
So I think it's always worth it. And a lot of them do have... Attempt to kind of connect with artists in the community.
So if there is a film festival in your community, check and see if they have an art component. And if they don't, sometimes it's worth approaching the organizer and say, hey, like I'm a local artist. I would love to see us maybe organize something in connection with the film festival and really make it a bigger thing. Because obviously those two things go hand in hand. Film is an art, Cinema is an art form if you're making art that... Deals in moving images at all, the connection is very obviously natural. And even if you don't deal in moving images, the connection is very obviously natural.
So it requires a little bit of research, but you know, most film festivals make this pretty simple and they are very often very open and receptive to whatever it is that you are interested in doing.
Haiver | 25:51
Yeah, it's interesting to think about where money resides in relation to the art world. And I hear a lot of curators talk about how difficult it is to get tech bros in Silicon Valley with their big startup money to buy art and collect art and care about this when they want to change the world instead. But in Hollywood, I find there are a lot of filmmakers and producers who have deeply invested in the broader art world outside of Hollywood.
Like George Lucas is a big collector and has his museum that's opening in LA. Steven Spielberg is a big collector.
I mean, David Geffen's name is on, you know, is now the name of our symphony hall, basically here in New York at Lincoln Center. So that connection to me has always been really intriguing.
Alissa Wilkinson | 26:36
Yeah, you know, and these are people who value art and don't always expect a return on it the way that tech people do, you know, to get into the film business is to expect to lose money all the time. So the calculus is a little bit different in general. But I will say going to a film festival is a good way to connect with people who are very passionate about the art form generally, who you may never know about. I have gone to festivals in I mean, you know, I go to one in central Missouri, which may or may not mean anything to you, but it is not a place known for its incredibly art-soaked culture necessarily, but people come from all over the place to see documentaries. That's just unusual. It's a good way to connect with people who may be really interested in your work.
Haiver | 27:29
Yeah, and that festival, True Faults, has always been a particular favorite because it focuses on creative nonfiction. And I think when a lot of people who are listening to this think about documentary, they're picturing Ken Burns talking head with photos that zoom in on. And this is very much like creative nonfiction is a in which like how the story is being told can be just as creative around nonfiction. Can you unpack that a little bit more for us?
Alissa Wilkinson | 27:56
Yeah, I mean, and you'll find this at documentary festivals generally. They're more, you know, you can watch a kind of conventional documentary like journalistic documentary or If Ken Burns means something to people, it is that kind of like, you know, very educational documentary. These are generally not what you'll find at a documentary festival. It's more observational or it might be more experimental. You know, I've seen ones where they integrate, animation into them, or like, You know, I have a very fond memory of standing outside of a theater where the line was wrapped all the way around the block to watch a documentary that was basically just observing deep sea creatures. For an hour and a half, and it's like someone sent a camera down, and it's just this beautiful kind of almost ballet of deep sea, like super deep sea creatures.
So it's, you know, or a lot of people spending time with their family members and telling the story of their culture through their family, or things where you almost don't know what you're looking at. I was just at this festival, and we were talking about how several years ago, one of our favorites was a film about a cow, the star of the film was the cow in Switzerland. And we basically were just following the cow around for, and it sounds boring, but it was riveting. It was really funny. And, you know, it was a, The cow was the star of the film.
So that's the kind of stuff that... Festivals often favor because it first of all, is never going to get seen otherwise. And because it's unusual and it's exciting and it shows a slice of life rather than telling people what to think, which is, you know, whatever. That's what most of us are getting thrown at us on a daily basis.
Haiver | 29:52
Can you? Last question on festivals, and I want to move on to being a critic and the other parts of your writing life. But I'm curious if you could just like describe what your average day looks like at a festival as where this is your job.
And then maybe... Are festivals a good thing for the average person to attend?
Like, are they fun?
Alissa Wilkinson | 30:13
Yeah, well, when I'm working, like, let's say at Cannes, I get up. You know, at 7 a.m., and like inhale several espressos and eat a baguette.
And then I go to the theater and my first movie is usually between eight and 8:30 in the morning. And then I see between three and five movies that day. And sometimes I have to write a review in between those.
So... I don't do so much of this anymore, but some of my colleagues will be writing their review on their phone in between movies with their thumbs. I used to do a lot of that.
Yeah. And then you run out and you try to get a meal in between if you can.
And then often my last movie of the day at Cannes is at 9.45 p.m. That's sort of the last slot they have.
So you can end up seeing movies for 14 hours, 16 hours a day, and then you go home and you go to-- Or you might go to a party on the beach, 'cause you've got to make an appearance, and then you go to bed and you get up and do it all the next day. But it is very strange.
Like, for instance, two years ago, the first movie I saw at 8:00 a.m. When I landed at Cannes was "Megalopolis." which is Francis Ford Coppola's insane I still don't really know what that movie is about.
So... You know, watching a movie is weird enough. Watching it at 8 a.m. When you're jet lagged is just a real experience... Yes, you should go to a film festival. It's fun. It's just fun.
Yeah, you can't go to Cannes probably unless I think if you're like a normal person and you're part of a film club or something, you can sometimes get tickets. But there are some festivals that are industry only. And that is one of them. But lots of them just sell tickets.
Like, you can go to Sundance. You can go to the New York Film Festival. You can go to Berlin. You can go to... I think you can go to... I'm not sure if you can go to Venice. But a lot of film festivals, you can just go rock on up and get a ticket and go see a movie. You can go to the premiere of a movie. With the star in the room. That's cool.
I mean, it's less cool for me these days, but it'd be very cool experience. But you're getting to like, kind of inhale the vibes. And sometimes you're getting to see a movie that may never come out in a normal theater. That's awesome. You are supporting an art form that needs support.
So I think it's a great experience.
Haiver | 33:08
Yeah, as you know, I for many years would get a 10 pack of tickets to go see movies at the New York Film Festival. And I went to see Parasite, because Bong Joon-ho is one of my favorite directors of all time, and he had not yet won the Oscar for this.
So everyone else was waking up to the fact of how amazing he was. He's there. He did a master class on directing. But the actor showed up and handed out peaches, which if you've seen the movie, they might be poisoned.
So that was very insider baseball funny.
Alissa Wilkinson | 33:39
Yeah, and actually that brings up the good point that if you do this frequently, the director or actors or other people involved with the film will be there and they'll do like a little talk back afterwards. So you get to hear extra stuff about the movie, which is pretty cool.
Haiver | 33:53
Yeah, that's the thing I miss most from getting DVDs, honestly. I'm curious. In your job as a critic, which you've had for well over a decade now at several different publications, most recently Vox and now The New York Times, what's the biggest misconception you think people have about critics?
Alissa Wilkinson | 34:14
That is a good question. I think that critics don't like movies.
Like a lot of people think that our job is to criticize movies, which I understand why. It sounds like it's in the word. Or critique movies is sometimes the word I hear. And I, again, I understand why that's the word. It makes sense. I don't think about the job that way at all. I think that our job is to expand movies, and give context to movies and explore movies or any art form, you know, whatever your art form is that you're writing about as a critic. But we wouldn't do this job if we didn't love the art form. Passionately. It doesn't pay that well. And it's a lot of work. But it is fun to take a thing you love, pay very close attention to it, and then write about it for an audience who hopefully then take something away from it. And one thing I always say to my students when I teach criticism is that When you read my review, my goal is not for you to get to the end and know what I think.
I mean, I want you to know what I think. Because obviously if you don't I failed. But that's not my ultimate goal. I want you to have a better sense of what you think after you finish reading what I wrote.
Like I see a review as a way for you to explore your own thoughts and feelings about something or even just about the world by reading what I've written. So yeah, I write about it because I love it. I'm not there to like find all the bad stuff and point it out. And there are critics who think that's their job and I just don't think they're any good at their job. And I think it's boring to read and I refuse. I think the critics who have lasted and who continue to be read and who are interesting are the ones who are always trying to find a way to take the object away that they're writing about, whether it's a painting or a book or... Music or movie and sort of open it up for their reader and say, "Come with me. Let's walk around inside this thing and see what it has to say to us." So I think that's... Probably. The biggest misconception and the one that I think it's very exciting when you get past that point and realize that a review really should do more than that.
Haiver | 36:49
Yeah, I mean, one of the things I really learned from you over the years, right, when I would give feedback on something, I often would start with just those nitpicky, negative things that I could critique. And it took me so long to learn that the good things are not as obvious to everyone else. And I was not saying them because they seemed obvious to me. And so I was like, obviously, everybody else can see them. Anytime you use the word obviously, like, you know, you're getting into trouble, probably.
Yeah. I think the students experience that a lot and the benefits of that now in how we're doing our cohort feedback sessions.
So you kind of draw out the connection between these words, right? But in art settings, we do things that might be called a critique or a crit, and it shares the same root word as critic. What do you see as the connection then between those different activities?
Alissa Wilkinson | 37:37
I mean, I think... Because I teach and I do crits with my students. We call them workshops as writers, but it's the same thing. And I, you know, when we do workshops, we're, we are looking for things, right? We're trying to find stuff that we would improve and stuff that we have questions about and things that we, that resonate with us. And those are things that I am doing as a critic.
Like when I'm watching a movie, I am looking for that stuff. That's, that is where I start. And I'm starting with like what I feel. When I encounter the movie.
So, you know, my notes have places where I'm like, disgusted with something or I'm overjoyed with something. But I think that The place where those two things are the same very much the same is that they're both about paying really close attention to things. Like attending closely is sort of the language we use. I can't, critique. I can't give good feedback and I can't be a good critic if I'm not very closely attending to something and sort of paying it what it's due, like taking it seriously on its own terms. I need to look at it and say, what is this thing trying to be? And how do I feel about it is being successful or not. And one thing that I hate when critics do this, I think it's very bad, is sometimes saying, I don't like this because I want it to be something else. But I actually have to start by going to it and saying, what are you? And okay, are you being successful at what you are? That's really where I'm going as a critic. There are types of things, types of movies I don't really like, but if I'm writing about it, I need to take it on its own terms and not, ask it to be something other than what it is. Just like I wouldn't ask a person to be a different person in order to be acceptable to me. Have to take them on their own terms.
So it's that attention. And then the second part of the attention for a critic anyhow is that I, so I attend to the thing and then I attend to myself. I have to actually be able to discern how I feel about it. And in a workshop, it's the same way. I have to be able to see how I'm reacting to this piece of writing and then kind of understand why.
Like, do I not like this because it's triggering something in me that's specific to me? Because of an experience I had or someone, it's reminding me of someone I know that I don't like? Or is it something in the writing that we could talk about and sort of shape and think about.
So I think that's, the relationship between them. Even though obviously criticism then results in the production of a new piece of art, which is the review or the essay or whatever you're writing.
Haiver | 40:42
Yeah, we said early in this program, the Jerry Saltz quote came up, right? What would I like about this if I were the kind of person who liked it? Which very much feels of a piece like this, like, Every artist is making their own thing. It's very different in what it is and what it wants to be in the world. And they made it because they presumably like it and are assuming that there are other people in the world who will like similar things. And that doesn't mean it's for you, but a critic's job is to be this omnivorous, curious person who takes every object on its own terms while at the same time checking themselves and saying, where does this fit in with me and who I am?
Alissa Wilkinson | 41:23
Yeah. This is tricky with movies. I'll just say this is tricky with movies because Movies are highly commercial products that are made by giant corporations sometimes. And those giant corporations are sometimes just making what my good friend A.O. Scott, who had my job before I did, calls giant ATMs in the sky, right?
Like just money rain down machines. And sometimes you have to take the movie on that term and just say, that's what this is. I don't like it, you know? And some That holds true in the visual art world too.
Like some visual art is bad because it's cynical, I think, in that it's made to merely extract money from people's pockets. I don't think that's the function of art. But, you know, you can't know that unless you're willing to take it as the thing it is first.
So, yeah.
Haiver | 42:25
Yeah, it's funny. The last time I went to freeze here when I was here in New York and it's coming back soon, there was a Jeff Koons booth that had like what looked like blow up inflatable, the Hulk, like Marvel's the Hulk. They were like larger than life size. And I, You could see it as both silly and fun, and you could see it as cynical and stupid, and both could be true at the same time, which I really appreciate that holding that dichotomy in place.
Alissa Wilkinson | 42:55
And it's the Hulk, right? So it's probably a commentary on that fact.
Haiver | 43:00
Completely. So what are some of the other traits that you think make a good critic, whether that's in film or otherwise? Because you've written about other mediums as well.
Alissa Wilkinson | 43:13
Yeah, I mean, curiosity you mentioned briefly, but I think that's a huge one. I think there are incurious critics, people who refuse to imagine things experiences beyond their own. And that is like a horrifying trait to run across in a critic. I have to be able, if I imagine that art is the way that an artist processes the world, which is exactly how I imagine it, then I have to imagine that when someone processes the world and I don't understand it, that the problem may not be the artist. The problem may be me. And that I am here to learn, right? That the, I try to imagine that the film is a gift. Being given to me or the art is a gift that someone is handing me to tell me about themselves.
Sometimes it's not good, but that's where I try to start from. So the curiosity is a big part of it.
So that's important. I think.. Omnivorous is important, by which I mean If I speak of film criticism, there is a type of film critic who only understands film. And doesn't spend time at museums and doesn't really read books. And doesn't, you know, listen to music or go, you know, or doesn't travel, like doesn't kind of try to take in as much as possible. And I think this really shows up in writing about film because all you have to work with is... Film stuff. That can work.
You know, there's a kind of writing that's like that, but I don't personally find that very interesting. And I don't think that My readers anyhow find that interesting because most of them are not film historians or film nerds. Most of them are just like people reading film reviews over their coffee. They want something else, right?
So, I want to be able to draw on references from all over the place. I want to be able to bring in a philosophical reference, but I want to be able to maybe quote Taylor Swift or whatever.
You know, I want to be able to bring in all these things. That requires... Being willing to kind of put myself in lots of different places.
So that is really important. Obviously, a critic needs to be able to write, right? Obviously, but actually that may not be as obvious as it seems.
So, yeah. And I think there's a kind of... Humility, I'm so humble. No, but there's like a kind of humility that you need to have where you have to assume that you are not smarter than the art is. Kind of.
Yeah. This one's hard to describe, but you kind of know it when you see it, when someone assumes that they have, they alone have like spotted the hole in this artwork and that they...
You know, they just know more. I want to assume that this person meant to do everything. That is in the artwork, and I'm going to interpret it through that lens. I want to be generous, I guess maybe is the right way to say it. That doesn't mean that I think everything is good. I very much do not think everything is good. There are great movies. And there are very bad movies, and most movies are in the middle, they're fine...
You know, that's just the nature of things. But I want to try and be generous and assume, like, you were trying to make a good movie.
Like, most people try to make good art. They're not trying to make bad art.
So, like, what happened here? Or, like, what is going on with this thing? And how could I write about it in a way that at least... Pays tribute to that fact. Making a movie is really hard.
Like the fact that anybody manages to make a movie or a painting or a piece of video art or write a book, my goodness, is a absolute miracle and That's amazing. And I'm not giving a participation trophy to people just to say, like, wow. But I need to be frank and clear when my job is to say this. Isn't working or you know, this is the reason because I owe what I owe is to the to my reader So all of those things I think are really important For the critic those are all important and that you know that holds even if you're not an actual critic I think those are attitudes that are important to approach art with no matter what the end result is, even if you're never going to write anything about it and you're just walking around a museum.
Haiver | 48:05
That's really important to say. The generosity that you bring to this is something I really appreciate. And we will have art critics come in later this year and talk to us as well. And I've read some of their work. I've read a lot of their work, and I have mixed feelings about how they go about it.
So I'm really glad that you're setting the tone for us in terms of that generosity of spirit and wanting to take the work on its own terms. That said... Is it fun? To write a scathing review when you've got those that like that bottom tier and i'm curious if that changes depending on who is releasing the movie.
Alissa Wilkinson | 48:43
Yes, I'll answer that in the opposite order. So I will... I pretty much refuse to write a scathing review of a... Of a first film like someone's first film. Or of a small...
Like low budget film. Generally.
Like, if you make a movie and it's at Sundance and it's your first movie, like... Amazing. Kudos to you. I am so proud of you. I have no reason to trash you in print. Certainly, I'm not going to trash you in print in the New York Times. I will not be, like, I just wouldn't do it. There's, nobody's gaining anything for that. I probably, if I was assigned to review your movie, I would write about what was interesting about your movie and then say, like, ultimately, it doesn't work. That's not trashing you. That's being honest, but that's a different thing. And I have written those. Or sometimes I will write...
Yeah, I mean, that would basically be... I just published a review that I actually think is somewhat like this of a movie called Undertone, which is a very good movie in some respects and totally falls apart at the end. But it is the director's first movie ever. He did something super interesting with it, and I am eager to see what he does next. And I even made it a critics pick because I think people should see it, even though the last 25% or so kind of is a mess.
So... That's how I look at that. However, if it is... There are movies that are critic-proof. Which is like Superman will make, well, actually Superman's a bad example because that was a good movie, but a movie like Superman or I don't know, an Avengers movie is going to make a literal billion dollars no matter what I write about it.
So if it's bad, I can say anything I want. It does not matter. I will get a lot of angry emails. That's fine. I can take it. I'm a woman on the internet. I've got, I've seen it all.
So... I have no compunction about trashing it if it's bad. I have no compunction about praising it if it's good. I gave Superman... A critic's pick, yeah, because I thought it was a very good movie. And I was like, this is great. I'm going to do that.
So, yes. So to your question, it is delightfully fun to write a pan. A highly negative review of a movie that is actually terrible. Part of the reason is that it is humor writing at that point.
Like, Nobody is going to read my review if I'm just like, this is bad and it's bad and all of it's bad. It is really fun to write like a funny piece of writing about how bad it is. And I only get to write those a couple times a year at tops, but often they are the funniest pieces of writing ever. That I get to do. Truly one of the best things I ever wrote was a review of this movie, "The Snowman." which is coming back into yeah kind of coming back into view because it's about detective harry hole which is the real name of the detective and he there's gonna be a netflix series so people are rediscovering the existence of this person it's not pronounced that way in norwegian i am made to believe but in any case i sometimes go back and reread that review myself because I can't kind of believe I wrote it because it's so funny. And I just sort of like went into a fugue state when I wrote it because the movie is so transcendently awful that I just, I was like in a state of shock.
So those are really fun to write. But I will say I don't love reading fiction. Hands like that when it seems like it's mean-spirited. Like, it should feel like we're having fun here. And I have-- I'm trying to remember what it was. At least once I have written one of those and gotten an email from someone like the screenwriter or something, Gosh, I wish I could remember what movie it was. I definitely got one once from the screenwriter who said, "I am sitting in my bed reading your review laughing." Like... "Thank you. This is so funny. You're totally right." Which is a scary email to receive, but kind of fun. At least if you're going to trash it, we should all have fun with it.
So that's my feeling. That's different from saying, "This movie is a waste of your time." That is a different kind of a review to write. But a true negative review is just a real fun piece of writing to create.
Haiver | 53:36
Yeah, in the attention economy, many of us are certainly relying on film critics and television critics to help us know how to spend our time. When we go to something in the art world, right, we go because of the name of the gallery and the name of the artist. The review is often there to help us process afterwards, but I mean, at least the way I do it, I tend to go gallery hopping. It's like, all right, I'm going to hit five galleries and I'd pick the galleries because I trust their taste. For me, at some point, like when I was in my 20s and like still working in film production, right, it was for me finding a critic whose taste I trusted. And that turned out to be, you know, Scott.
So very much in that. And I remember the first really good, like weird, unexpected piece of writing I read as criticism was a piece of, it was a Jack Black movie. What's the one where With the Lilliputians and like you get trunk and it's based on a famous novel.
Alissa Wilkinson | 54:34
Gulliver's Travels?
Haiver | 54:36
Yes. Thank you.
Yeah. Yes. Yes. And he wrote the review as a letter in the form of a letter, and all the grammar and punctuation of that. And I was like, you can do this.
Like, which is what helped me start to realize that criticism is its own art form. It's a piece of literary art, and it has its own rules and conventions here. So I'm curious how-- you've kind of alluded to this a little bit here. About the business side of art within cinema. We know it in the art world because the art world functions with galleries and art fairs. You're working at this intersection of art and commerce. And I'm curious, how else does the commerce side, the business side of movies influence what or how you write?
Yeah.
Alissa Wilkinson | 55:30
Well, So I am of the opinion. And not everybody is. But I'm of the opinion that it's very important for critics to understand the business. Of the art that they're writing about.
So some people prefer to just focus on the object. But to me, And this is very true of movies, but it's increasingly true of all art forms because Certainly in the US, all of our art is produced in a highly capitalist system. We don't have government support basically at all now. We don't have public support of the arts. That really matters when you're talking about how types of art come into being. None of it is considered a public good.
You know, by the powers that be. So when you think about what got produced, you have to talk about the material conditions under which it gets produced. And that helps explain sometimes why things are the way they are.
So that really matters. And I think that I need to be aware of that. I need to understand, for instance, the labor unions that are part of my business. And there are a lot of them and that matters. I need to understand increasingly all the technologies that behind them.
I mean, this is a very small and silly example, but kind of illuminating. If people watch documentaries on Netflix that are made particularly in the US, although not only. Documentaries made for Netflix over the past five years or so have increasingly, and you'll notice this now, you'll never be able to unsee it, and I'm sorry. They have like a little trailer for themselves at the beginning of the movie, always. This is every Netflix documentary. It starts, the subject comes and sits down, they clap the clapboard, the subject says something, and then there's like, And they say something provocative.
And then there's like this little mini trailer where you see like fast clips from the whole movie. Then you see the title.
And then it goes back and starts over. That is not how documentaries used to be. Every single one is like that now. That is a commerce reason. That style is not something filmmakers want to do. They've told me this. That is Netflix. They said, look... People will shut off the documentary. Within three minutes. Unless you tell them what it's about from like soup to nuts immediately.
So that little bit at the beginning is the way to hook the audience. In a streaming economy. That's crazy when you think about it, that the streamer the fact of the streaming platform has worked its way back on the art form itself. And you can probably think of ways that is true in whatever art form you're working in, right? But if I didn't know that, I might just criticize the film for doing that it's much more interesting to know why it's happening and to know that this is a studio choice, not a filmmaker choice. There are a lot of other ways in which this is true, but that's just like one example. When people complain about sequels and reboots, they often say filmmakers have run out of ideas, but it's not the filmmakers at all, right? This is a commercial consideration from the studios. That's all they'll pay for.
So it's that kind of stuff that I think really comes from commercial consideration and from understanding the business. That's true in every art form, but movies are especially like this. And this is going to become true as AI becomes part of the movie business more and more. It certainly was true as algorithms become more and more part of decision-making and Yeah, so I think all of that is really important because it is actually part of the art form. It's not like something that sits separately outside of the art form. And with movies, it's super true because there's so many moving pieces that go into it. It's not like me when I write a book.
I mean, I do have to sell it to a publisher, but after that, I'm basically just sitting at my desk and writing a book for five years by myself. A movie is not that kind of a thing.
Haiver | 59:45
It reminds me, I mean, in some ways with the museum world, right, you can think that the museum world is somehow separate from commerce. But then there was the piece that came out this year about Hauser and Wirth and how the artists that they've had in their stable of artists that they rep have had a disproportionate number of museum shows, solo shows. And so they're getting and that is then affecting their market to be able to sell.
So someone has the right connection is making the right backroom deals to boost their artists above anyone else's. And so it's not just at the art fair and the gallery level itself, like it trickles all the way down or it comes down to sometimes shows happen because a wealthy donor has helped fund that show. And so that's what's keeping the museum staff from, you know, having to let go 15% of their staff, which is happening a lot right now. And so, what does that wealthy donor want to give for?
Yeah. And you're kind of tied to the strings of that. I know that with several shows recently that friends of mine have been in and had some kind of curatorial relationship with. It makes me wonder, your comment about the first three minutes of all these Netflix docs, if I went to all of David Zwirner or Gagosian's artists' Instagram pages, which is our version of the algorithm in a lot of ways, would I see any similarities if I funneled them just by gallery?
Like, are they being coached to behave in certain ways? And what could we learn by doing that?
So I think I just gave myself a homework assignment, which is very exciting. You're welcome. Thank you. I'm looking forward to it.
So when you wrote We Tell Ourselves Stories, your book about Joan Didion, you touched on her and her husband, John Gregory Dunn's time in Hollywood, writing movies, writing screenplays, and writing. John Donne had written a really famous seminal book on how the business of Hollywood works. And if I remember right, when you went out to the archives, you got to handle some of the original notes from that and take notes from his notes. Can you just talk about some of the things you learned about the business while working on that book?
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:01:58
Yeah, sure. So he actually wrote two books about Hollywood. They're both fantastic. The first one is called The Studio. That came out, I think, in the early 70s. That book is the one that you're talking about. And it, So what happened was Daryl Zanuck, who was the head of 20th Century Fox at the time, let him, for reasons unknown to him, or anyone hang out on the back lot at 20th Century Fox for a year, just sort of like wander around. He gave him a studio, office. Later John was like, I don't know why he let me do this. And it was the year that Dr. Doolittle, the movie starring Rex Harrison, which famously was a catastrophe at the box office, Although it's become kind of a classic since then, but it was a huge catastrophe. It was flopping, basically, that year. They were testing it with audiences, and it was a huge flop, and everyone was freaking out.
So that's what you get in the book. And so you get a really good look at kind of a moment in Hollywood, the way that studio bosses think, the marketing engine. And so John-- so it's the '70s. You just write notebooks.
So John has all these little notebooks like this big. And he just was scribbling in them. And they were sitting in the archive at Berkeley when I went out there. His archive and Didion's archives were together. And thankfully, I can't read her handwriting, but I could read his. And you just see very...
Like writing dialogue. He was writing basically what people were saying. And he said he would just furiously sit in the corner and scribble.
And then he would run back to his office and type it up on his typewriter, which is how you had to do things back then. It's really remarkable reporting. And it was super interesting just to see these guys, these like suits, you know, they were business guys. That's who he's listening to. Talk about, I mean, this is the, this is a period of time that we think of as like a real golden age in filmmaking. But they're just talking about these things as commercial products again. It was a very expensive movie. Rex Harrison was very expensive and there's a lot of animals in this movie, like real animals.
So that is expensive and puppet animals. So you just see them talking about it and talking about how we need to test it with this audience and this audience. We need to reshoot this and all of that.
Like all that stuff has been there since the beginning, really in Hollywood. It's always been a business and independent filmmaking as we know it just didn't exist really at the time. In the 80s, so John and Joan were screenwriters and they worked together and wrote a bunch of movies together and rewrote a lot of movies uncredited. In the 80s, one of the movies they wrote together is Up Close and Personal, which stars Robert Redford and Michelle Pfeiffer as journalists. It took them eight years to get that movie made. They kind of came up with the idea and then they sold it to one studio and then it went through what we call development hell and it ended up at another studio.
So he wrote a book about that, which is called Monster. I highly recommend this book, but it reads very differently. And that one is basically a book about... Being stuck in development hell, but it's a really good glimpse into some of the sexism in the industry because By the 80s, Joan Didion was much more famous than John was. She was definitely the more well-known of the pair, even though they were both very successful writers. And he tells a lot of stories about the way that she would be treated by the executives.
So it's kind of interesting in that way. Yeah, so all of that was like, quite fascinating. And she wrote about Hollywood as well, but she would write about it in typical Didion fashion on as kind of an outsider, That's how she preferred to write about it, even though she totally wasn't an outsider. But his books are these just like really fun, Very energetic, very funny books that really give you a snapshot of a moment in history and give you a good sense of how the business, honestly, how the business still works in a lot of ways.
Haiver | 01:06:29
Yeah, it's amazing how little has changed on some fronts.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:06:33
Absolutely. Yeah. - Yeah, I mean, nobody really knows.
Haiver | 01:06:34
Yep. - How do you see the film world evolving in the years to come?
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:06:42
Everybody's scared. If you watch the Oscars... You heard Conan O'Brien making jokes about it, but, you know... It's scary. Right now, there are not a lot of jobs. The industry is contracting. There's a bunch of reasons for that. One is that, it expanded greatly when all the streamers, streaming platforms appeared during COVID. This is Hollywood specific, by the way, this is not the film business all over the world, but what happens in Hollywood kind of expands to the rest of the world, unfortunately. But again, we don't have public funding for films at all, basically, in the US. And what little we had is basically gone at the moment.
So The jobs are going away because those streaming platforms expanded too fast, essentially. And now are cutting way back on their programming. On top of it, if you follow the business at all, you know that there's been this year-long thing with Warner Brothers, which is one of the great... Old Hollywood Studios, this is you know, DC and Casablanca and like all these important things in Hollywood history. That studio is probably being bought by Paramount, although it looked for a while like it might be being bought by Netflix. My personal opinion is that Paramount is the worst option of the two, but it's certainly being bought by one or the other. This is... By all accounts, somewhat catastrophic for the business. A lot of people are going to lose their jobs. Warner Brothers is the studio behind both Sinners and One Battle After Another, which were the two movies that basically took all the awards at the Oscars.
So it's somewhat ironic. But that is a big scary thing that people... I haven't been in L.A., this year, but I have just Apparently this is the only thing anyone's talking about.
And then add to that AI, which is really frightening people. And the big reason it's frightening people is not the technology itself. A lot of people are really interested in what the tech can do and how it can help them.
You know, film is a tech driven medium and new developments in technology have always been really interesting. Transformative in film, you can think of like the addition of sound or the addition of or when cameras get smaller and lighter, you can do more things, you can shoot on location, all that stuff. AI does have the possibility, if studios don't use it well, to cut out a whole bottom rung of jobs, which means, you know, like background actors, for instance, or, you know, people who are kind of learning on the job how to do things like effects or color timing or sound, stuff like that. That means it's going to be harder to get into the industry. And it means that people who don't have money or means are going to find it harder to kind of just find their way into the industry.
So it not only cuts out jobs, but it makes the ladder kind of takes a couple of rungs off the ladder. And that is scaring the crap out of people. And right now the unions are negotiating their contracts again this year. This is the actors skilled, the directors, all those, the writers.
So this is going to be a big deal. So with all those things in play, People are just really evaluating whether this is a sustainable business.
And then all of this trickles out to world cinema, which, you know, across the world, a lot of these things, AI certainly is one of them, have their own effects. And some countries have more shelters in place or have more policies that are designed to make sure that their national cinemas are more sustained. We don't really have that in the US, but it's still, you know, it can have its effects. And there are some countries where the artists really care, but the governments maybe don't, and there's a tug of war there.
So I don't know. I will say on the flip side, the good thing about all this streaming platform stuff is that.
No matter where you are on Netflix. And that, I think, is... It's cool, but it means, for instance, my own students are much more well-versed in film from around the world. And that means that people are experiencing one another's cultures more frequently than they used to. It used to be, if you didn't live in New York or Los Angeles or whatever in the US, you probably would never see a movie from another culture.
So at least for us, that's great. And I think it is true for many other places.
Haiver | 01:11:57
Yeah, I've been very inspired. I think we both have been by Gen Z's interest in cinema when We ask kids of our friends, what movies are you excited about or what movies have you seen recently? They're just watching banger after banger, just like the greatest hits. Not just the last 20 years, though. Those are some of the movies I love most.
And then talking about it on Letterboxd. I want to close out our time here thinking about the relationship between experimental film, art film, and the broader Hollywood world. We have several artists working in video here in the program, some of them working generatively with video, like altering it, some of them working with AI in their art making. I'm curious. What your relationship is like to art film as a film critic with this what is arguably one of the best perches to do that from in the US, certainly.
Like where did the worlds intersect? Like to you and I'll bring up here like two years ago the Whitney Biennial I had two curators and one of them was the curator at the Whitney who specializes in video art And so there were probably a dozen different video pieces spread throughout the show some of them as long as like over an hour long It's like you're walking through a show and you're like, well I guess I'm just gonna sit here for an hour if you I if I want to see this and but then they have like 60 films in their programming that you could come in and watch in the cinema or watch online through a link.
So film is very central to parts of the art world for particular curators and particular art, I don't want to say consumers, but art viewers, when you have a particular interest in it. So I'm curious, again, how these worlds intersect for you.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:13:51
Yeah, it was really interesting when the MoMA redesigned their permanent galleries. They integrated, when the Museum of Modern Art did, they integrated cinema, like, film into the galleries, Trying to make it clear that this was part of the evolution of fine art, fine visual art, and not a thing unto itself, which I really appreciated.
So if you go through the permanent collection, you will see the images of cinema integrated into all the other art. And the point they were making was that modern artists are seeing movies and that is working back on the kind of things that they make.
So I think that is important. I you know, Yeah, so one of my favorite filmmakers, one of my favorite documentarians is Laura Poitras, who made Citizen Four, which is...
You know, and all the beauty and the bloodshed. And she's just, she's an activist, documentarian, and an incredible artist. And she had a show at the Whitney years ago, and she works in both mediums. She makes art film and she makes documentaries and her art film are documentaries, but they're art film, you know, there's this.
So I think what's interesting is that, Art films. This may not answer your question, but it is something I think about art film. Demands place-based viewing. Generally, like you don't watch it at home.
So like I, when Christian McCauley's The Clock was at the MoMA, which is kind of a blockbuster exhibition whenever they do it, you cannot watch that in your house. I actually was kind of bummed. I thought I could for some reason, and I can't. You have to go there, get a ticket, wait in line, and sit in the room to watch it, even though it's literally made up of movies. There's something very radical about that, actually. In a world that is... Turning cinema into something that's platform agnostic. You can watch it like on your phone or in your house or wherever you want and And I feel like the Art. Filmmakers or video artists or anyone who's kind of working on the art side of things have a real opportunity to like radically transform the way people think about the moving image and place.
Like, I'm very passionate about people thinking about their relationship to screens. How is my body in relationship to the screen?
Like to me, what we lose when we watch a movie on a small screen is the feeling of being dwarfed by it, right? It's good for us to be smaller than the movie. That's actually like physically good for us.
You know, you have the opportunity to do something in your own medium that kind of like makes people experience that or jars them. So much of our lives are lived through screens and in relationship to moving images.
So much of our lives, right? And the artist gets to... Move people and shock people and sort of rearrange your internal furniture. And I think like filmmakers want to do that, like traditional filmmakers, but there is a desensitization that has happened to most people because most of us have like watched a lot of TV and movies and we just don't think of it that way anymore.
So when I go to see When I often don't go to see art film, I just kind of accidentally happen upon it or video art or something like that in a biennial. I... It like shifts something internally. I am thinking right now of something we saw at the Venice Biennale a couple years ago. There was a video piece. With people crawling over sand dunes. Do you remember what I'm talking about? And it, I mean, it was so, it stuck with me. I remember it so clearly. I think I watched it three times. It's like half an hour long. And I still don't even know what it is. I can't even remember who the artist was. I've had to look it up several times. But there was something incredibly radical about my experience watching it that I have not had that experience watching a movie, which is a crazy thing for someone who watches about 300 movies a year to say.
So I think that relationship is interesting. I think the artist has an opportunity to... Shift how We... Watch the rest of our lives. And every time I watch, some kind of experimental film, that is kind of what I'm thinking about. That doesn't mean that it is in service to film. Film is not some superior art. But it is true that most people have a lot of experience watching movies and TV and the internet and video and all of that stuff.
So there's just like something very special and unique and interesting about what the artist gets to do. Yeah, so all of that is true. And... A lot of it does have to do with the way that you... To kind of relate to it as the viewer. It's shocking, you know, in a way that you just don't experience in a cinema.
Haiver | 01:19:29
Right. My favorite piece in last year's Venice Biennale, which is not the one we were at together, was the British Pavilion. And there was this video artist doing lots of multi-screen works with the soundscape that's shared by all of them in a single space. And there's both work on screens, but some projection work. And the space is set dressed in a way, like you're entering into an environment that you move between multiple spaces for viewing.
Yeah. At your own pace. And that's just, it's really compelling to be in an immersive thing like that. And that was still, that was at human scale. It wasn't dwarfed by it, but it was still doing something in your body.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:20:09
Right. I mean, being dwarfed is not so much about size. It's just about your that's not something you experience with your body much. Humans are bigger than most of the living things in their environment.
Haiver | 01:20:26
And we designed it that way, yeah. We recently went to go see A. Young Kim's Delivery Dancer at MoMA PS1 here in New York. And for those that don't know Delivery Dancer, it's a triptych of films that's sum total of across the three films made over several years is about 90 minutes in length.
So it's basically a feature length movie in that sense. But we had to move between rooms to see part one, part two, part three. I ran into that least favorite thing of mine, which is I always wish there was a timer by the door that would tell me when it's going to start again so I can enter at the beginning and not have to wait for it to loop and like be out of emotional sync with it.
So that was Someone needs to design that, please.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:21:10
Although I kind of like it, to be honest. I was thinking about this because I like the idea that the art exists separate from me. I have very little control over it. I have to cede control to the art. And I am not the important thing here.
So I don't know.
Haiver | 01:21:26
Yeah. I love that. When we got to the end of viewing this 90 minutes worth of material, it still had this amorphous quality to what had actually happened in the story. And you used this term "pseudonarrative," which I found really compelling. I'm curious, could you unpack that term a bit, what pseudonarrative means and how you see it at work in a lot of art, film or video art?
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:21:55
Yeah, well, in this case, there was a narrative to the story, or there was a narrative to the films. There were characters, there was a story, kind of, but The point is, to me was not the story.
Like the story seemed to be just there because it's a time-based medium with characters and so they're going to do things and the time will move forward and that's just, that's how stories are. Like, life has a narrative, but not really.
You know? Like, nobody wrote the story. And to me, like, we on screens, when there are characters doing stuff, expect a story to emerge. And it is...
Like almost impossible to imagine that not happening. And when I watch video art that isn't fully abstract. I think what I said to you is I never think about the plot because it would, first of all, distract me from what I think the point is, which is to kind of take it in as light Like, you know, the kind of thing about cinema is writing with light.
I mean, that is exactly what's happening with video. - Heart. And In that case, the artist, what I understood to be happening is sort of processing elements of their life and identity through what's going on the screen. And there was a lot of kind of like almost... Dance movements. With the two characters and there's some statement about commerce and I don't know place, but it's not, the point is not like what's going to happen to these people.
Like, I don't care what happens to these people. That is not the point of this. And it did keep a vault. It did keep, continue to evolve over the three kind of episodes. But it wasn't a narrative.
So I think of it as a pseudo-narrative because it is narrative in a sense. I mean, there's a beginning and an end, and some stuff happens in the middle. That's narrative. But there's not A narrative. There's not a plot. There is a meta-narrative.
So that's kind of interesting. But there's no, there's nothing going on. And I really like that. Thing because it allows me to kind of sink into it as art almost as if I'm watching a painting it's just that it's moving and it's on a screen and there are people in it who are doing things I find very calming and very similar in a way to when I go to a concert and I often am not actually really paying attention to the music and I find myself having creative epiphanies. Because something else is happening.
Haiver | 01:24:40
Right. It ends up being quite impressionistic and it has some... Cumulative effect I think where it started to trip me up was once we started hitting feature length, I wanted it to travel more.
So I have to, like you were saying earlier, check myself and say, well, what does the work want to be? How is this different from you know, film I go see in a movie theater. And how does video art function differently? How can it function differently? Let's not funnel it all into only having one way of being.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:25:11
Yeah, and I don't want to say... Like, I don't want to make this comparison too hard, but in a way it reminds me of like going to see like a Tarkovsky movie, you know, where it's like... It's not a hangout movie. That would be the wrong thing. But you're kind of just wandering around and don't really know what's going on. And you kind of at some point have to let go of the expectation that things will be occurring. Things are occurring, but there's not, you know, it's much more imitative of life. Where you know, when I get off this, I'm going to go sit over there and read some stuff. But Like, I'm not, a plot isn't happening, right? And it is very... Odd to experience that on a screen, but I think it's good for us.
Haiver | 01:26:00
Completely. The first time I saw Stalker, I had this exhausted from work and dozed in and out of consciousness. And my friend who I saw it with was like, that might be the perfect way to see it because that's basically the experience of watching the film.
I mean, I went back to Dave at the time it was due. So, yeah. One thing that's interesting from your biography is that you have a BS in information technology from a polytechnic school. And now you work squarely in the arts. And a lot of our students in this program don't come from art degree backgrounds.
So I'm curious what lessons you learned from that pivot that might be relevant to our students as we close here.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:26:45
Well, I mean, for one thing, I have realized I actually, you know, I graduated 20 years ago. I guess 21 years ago now. And it is true that having a tech degree in 2026 makes you more able to understand what's going on, certainly in the movies, but kind of in the art world generally.
You know, as an artist, you kind of, those things have converged on each other so hard that it's actually more legible at this point. And you can kind of understand how the tech world works. Better than a lot of people who only have art degrees. I have really found this as a critic. But more generally, I think that You know, for a long time that wasn't true. And what I have always said is that I... What you learn in a tech degree is how to take a problem and break it down into small parts and solve those small parts and kind of work your way towards solving the problem.
And then when I made the pivot into the arts, I brought that skill with me. And I think that for a lot of people moving into an art fields. It's really important to think about what skills you have or what kind of, and I don't mean like things you can do, but more like ways of thinking that are different from other people. That you're bringing with you, because that is what gives you an edge. And it's what gives you, in my we call it an angle, like a journalistic angle. It's what gives you something to work with that makes you unique and different. And the tendency sometimes is to try to hide that stuff because you feel like it makes you stick out or it makes you seem less legitimate. But in general, the weirder you look on paper, the better off you are when you're trying to apply for a residency or a grant or something.
You know, talk to people like you look like someone who is interesting. Especially if your work speaks for itself.
Like if you really hone your craft, then you kind of have multiple things to draw on. I know for... Certain that I would not have my career now if I didn't have that on my And I only worked in tech for like two years or three years after graduation.
So, yeah, so I think just thinking about what makes you unique as an artist is really important. It's an asset, not a liability. And like, don't be afraid to talk about it and use it and think about what you're bringing with you into the your craft.
Haiver | 01:29:35
That's a fantastic note to close on. Thank you so much for being here with us. Thank you for all your insights on the what it means to be generous as a viewer of art and as someone, critiquing it, which is to say thinking about it deeply with care.
So thank you again, Melissa.
Alissa Wilkinson | 01:29:54
Of course. Thanks.
Haiver | 01:29:57
So that brings us to the end of our interview today. We have one week left in the program for this quarter. And I'm really excited. Next quarter, we'll be diving deep into how to write about art, specifically your art. And so I hope that a lot of what Alyssa Wilkinson had to share today will influence us in our thinking about how to approach that gently with ourselves, yet with seriousness and generosity, and how to approach our feedback sessions in our cohorts with a similar kind of generosity, letting the art be what it wants to be and trying to take it on its own terms.
So thank you again to her for all those great thoughts. And we will see many of you either in your cohorts for feedback sessions later this week. On Thursday, Dr. Polina Rood comes back to give her final art history lecture of the quarter. That'll be really exciting because we have different art historians coming in next quarter for us. And finally, if you haven't signed up yet for a one-on-one mentoring session, meeting with me, please make sure you go click on that Calendly link. It's in the News and Updates channel under the article labeled Three Updates. It's the first of the three updates.
So make sure you schedule that. There's only a week and a half left. If you want to have a one-on-one mentoring session this quarter, you should need to get it in. All right. We'll see you guys soon. Thanks again for being here.