Haiver â € | 00:00
Hi, everyone. I'm so excited to have you back here for our second art history lecture of the quarter. This is again focused on a refractory part of the practice of Jen and Kevin McCoy, our current visiting artists in residence. I'm excited because this lecture is going to specifically focus in part on the use of chance and randomness in art throughout both art history, as well as in more contemporary generative art practice. And as I was flipping through Polina's slides in the last couple days, I got really excited because she is someone who As I think all of us have realized in our cohorts this week, right, we have a large number of artists working with a tech-based practice or with a generative art practice. And as I flip through Polina's slides, I could really see how she was engaged with this material, even as someone outside of our community, you might say. And so she brought different language to the way of talking about it in a way of reframing it slightly off of center in a way that helps me to see and perceive it in new and exciting ways.
So I think this lecture will be exciting for two key reasons. One, We have a lot of generative artists in our community, and I think this lecture happening early in the program is going to really equip those who aren't familiar with that practice and art form to be able to engage more fully in the workshops we do, in the cohort feedback sessions that we do in the coming months.
So that's going to set up that part of our community for success. The other half is for those artists who are working in that discipline to learn more of our history, I think is really important. And like I said, to put new language and to re- frame how we're thinking about certain parts of our practice.
So I'm excited that she's here to help us do that. So I'm going to hand it off to Polina.
Polina Rud | 01:56
Hey, everyone. Nice to meet you again and it was a huge pleasure to share some ideas with you and to talk to you while we were chatting during this week about our previous talk and about everything that you were questioning and asking.
So today we're going to talk about our relationships with uncertainty. Because both in the past and today, what truly shakes a human being is this thought that any day can suddenly become a jump into the unknown. And that there are no guarantees, no guarantee that effort won't be in vain, no guarantee that decisions I made earlier were the right one. Every single time when we are speaking about uncertainty, We are speaking about guarantees and sometimes it's pretty struggling for us because there are no guarantees and I might be doubting whether I'm going to have any guarantees that my effort is not in vain or no guarantee the decisions that I made earlier were the right ones and In order to soften this tense relationship with the unknown, people have always tried to find something to lean on. And sometimes it was a roll of the dice, sometimes space, sometimes an attempt to connect with something irrational. That's something that exists beyond logic and beyond calculation.
So throughout history, humans have been searching for something these reference points, trying to understand what kind of truth it might be, what can I actually control and how much uncertainty am I willing to allow into my life. And this constant oscillation between control and unpredictability, between structure and chance, Between this desire to know and the acceptance of not knowing is exactly what degenerative art is about. It's all about how machines gradually learn to create art, how they begin to interact with their creators, and every single time we and the machines are in between this control and unpredictability. And eventually artists started to separate from them while they were interacting.
So we could have simply looked at these historical experiments with chance that resemble generative art and said that Okay, that was history, but what I wanted to show with this... Conference with this lecture is how our relationship with uncertainty itself evolved, how human consciousness learned to negotiate with chance and how through machines and algorithms we are changing our relations with uncertainty.
So in many pre-religious societies from the Paleolithic period through ancient pagan cultures, Here I have a question for you. What do you think, at that moment in history, was chance something to suppress or something to listen to? What do you think? And we are interacting in the chat. That was the reason why we were struggling with these technical issues because we wanted to have a dialogue with you.
So what do you think? In these ancient cultures, chance it was something to suppress or something to listen to.- Other ideas Listen to exactly they were not feared because of that because they understood these forces as creative tools, as natural spiritual forces that we have to use, that we have to integrate in our practice.
So if we look at Paleolithic art, for example, artists in caves like Lascaux, Altamira, they didn't try to dominate the surface, they worked with it, they used cracks, bulges and all the irregularities in the walls to shape animal figures. So the environment itself became this co-creative force. And later Aristotle made an important distinction. In the physics he distinguishes between different kinds of causes. He describes "tiche" which is chance as an accidental cause.
Something that happens outside of deliberate intention, but still within the realm of what could be otherwise, right? And techne, on the other hand, is a form of knowing.
So knowledge of making. It is this capacity to produce artifacts through the conscious application of causes. There might be material, formal, efficient, final, and tangible. What matters here is this relationship in between two of them. And as I saw the lecture of philosophy of art, you were speaking about Aristotle and this art is a form of knowing.
So that's why I really like this intersection in between all these lectures that we are doing here. And what matters here is the relationship in between two of them, as I said. Technique does not eliminate chance, it intervenes it. And the maker uses, Tijer is what Aristotle calls an incidental cause.
So unpredictability here is integrated in the process. And I can say, I think so, that it's a kind of a proto-theory of generativity, two and a half millennia earlier. .
To act within that order, inside of the canon, inside of the tradition. And in Byzantine iconography and in the canon developed by Andrei Rublev, everything was prescribed in advance: proportion, colors, and even the sequence of brushstrokes. The icon wasn't meant to be an interpretation or an expression of the artist in a world. It functions as a transmission of a sacred image.
So innovation here, and I want to underline it, that it was a heresy. It was impossible to think good about innovation. I'm a person with a continent of thoughts. No, innovation was heresy. And a similar logic operates in Islamic art. Their value lies in mathematical precision, symmetry, continuity.
So my question here for you, what happens with innovation Ego, if we work only with pattern or pre-designed rules, how does it feel? How does your ego feel if you work in this regime of creating? What do you think? Or how do you even not think? How do you feel your ego here?
I'm really interested because it's all about authorship. Okay, that's interesting to think that ego might be expressed through complexity.
Sometimes for ego, it's all about us. It's difficult to... I think that ego might be distributed, that I really like this response. Okay, check. Part of the machine, the individual is less important. Exactly. It feels like a balance because when you choose the rules, you have control, but then you have, okay, exactly. That's very interesting. What Emmy is mentioning in personal. Cosmovision, yeah. Interesting, Patricio, that you're saying if you're aligned to cosmovision and cosmos from God, you're good, you're safe. I really like this interpretation.
Somewhere else in the middle of this lecture, we will lose God and then we'll have to do everything in order to come back. So yeah, interesting. But in Islamic art, and somebody of you have already mentioned that, these patterns were supposed to dissolve the individual ego into a timeless order and in both cases chance was not invited into the process because uncertainty is resolved in advance through faith.
So at a certain point, the confidence that order was guaranteed by higher forces began to collapse because the plague wiped out the righteous and the sinful without distinction. So right now we don't understand who is good, who is bad, what about sins? The world suddenly revealed itself as unpredictable and this became an existential shock. At the same time, we understand that knowledge began to leave the monastery.
So printing accelerated thought made it reproducible, mobile and vulnerable to error. So truth no longer singular or fixed, it is multiplied and in that multiplication it lost its absolute center. And within this context the figure of the author changed. The author became someone who assumed responsibility so the name now mattered more than the lineage because the name carried risk right now if you're an author you're responsible of what you're doing what you're saying the author is the one whose thought might be wrong whose error can no longer be Justifying by appealing to the authority of the past, of the divine, of God, of the universe, whatever. And the human being is forced to confront uncertainty directly. Every action here in this context obviously becomes an experiment. Because when it's not guaranteed, when support from tradition or divine order disappears, so this support is not that guaranteed, right? The artist's gesture by itself becomes a risk. And while I was doing this presentation, I have never thought that Giotto may share the same slide with Sol Leavitt, but here it is. Because this risk in gesture can be associated with Giotto, with this great Italian artist. While working in Fresco, he operates under conditions of irreversibility.
So once the pigment touches the wet plaster, it cannot be corrected and the final result can never be fully calculated in advance. And in this Craveni Chapel around 1305, Giotto departs from the Byzantine canon because he introduces volume, spatial depth, individual emotion and these human poses that did not exist before. And at that time it was strange and risky because in doing so, Giotto takes these narrative risks because things are no longer closed or fixed. They become open to interpretation, meaning it's no longer fully guaranteed in France. And in this sense, Joto practice already anticipates something that will later appear and reappear, to say that I would love to add this prefix here, in conceptual art. The idea that the work does not dictate a single stable meaning, but creates conditions for meaning to emerge in this interaction with the person who is interacting them with this art. In 1533, Corinello Segripo, in three books of occult philosophy, formulates the idea of magia simpatica. That's a kind of... A vision of the world, and I'm putting here in this slide, as a network of hidden correspondences where causality is no longer linear but distributed. Philosophically, this means that the world is no longer understood as a simple chain of causes and effects, and events don't happen because of A single origin. But because there is a configuration of relations that come together at a specific moment and causality spread across the system. And this way of thinking is directly connected to what we now call system thinking, even though it appeared long before modern science. And we're going to come back to this idea. It reflects these early... Intuition that the whole cannot be reduced to the sum of the parts and that the behavior of a system cannot be fully predicted by analyzing one element in isolation.
So in this sense, Magi Symbatica can be read as a pro to systems of or proto This understanding of the world as a system, proto-systems understanding of the world. And this is where chance fully changes its meaning because it becomes not the opposite of order, but the signal of complexity.
So step by step, we're paving the way towards the thing that we need to see how we are going to connect these things. Chaos and order control and uncertainty. By the mid 17th century, uncertainty begins to be processed rationally, right? Because we cannot handle it irrationally. We are trembling right now. In other words, it started to be counted.
So between Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat, and while they were entangled in their discussions about gambling and the so-called problem of points, in their correspondence risk unexpectedly turns into an object of reason, it becomes something that can be analyzed, broken down, formalized, and here uncertainty is for the first time something that can be worked with computationally. And after the Great Fire of London, and here is the question for you, This way of thinking moves beyond theory.
So when risk can be counted, priced, compared, what kind of institutions do you think it may produce? Or what kind of institutions does that produce? What do you think? Tricio mentioned "As Above, So Below" that's an amazing movie. Strongly recommended! Interesting. I have an afterword for this lecture. I do not know whether Javier will allow us because we are not on time today, but maybe in relation to my afterword, we can mention this movie. Insurance companies, commodities, future. Okay, yes. Yes, you're so right. We see at that time, ensuring companies emerge.
So what they are doing, obviously, they're selling protection against future catastrophes. And randomness becomes a commodity. Risk is evaluated, and you have already seen this hint on the slide.
So that's why it was easier for you to understand. So risk is valued, and the future is translated into percentages, and uncertainty is built into this calculation. And the This logic, as we can imagine, penetrates culture as well. The art market begins to function as a space of speculation where artists like reverend become entangled in these financial expectations and investment risks. At the same time, another model of working with chance emerges in the musical games or dice games attributed to the circle of Mozart. Randomness becomes an explicit co-author because the composer defines the rules, the tables, the grammar, but the sequence itself is decided simply by a throw of the die. The author no longer fully controls the outcome. He designs systems or she/they design systems within which different results can occur.
So this logic captures the spirit of the era because at that time society learns to live without guarantees by embedding chance into science, economics, into art and life itself. Uncertainty here is no longer something to fear or to suppress, it becomes something to calculate, to design and increasingly then to rely on because you can earn some money because of that. By the 19th century, we see that Romanticism and the crisis of Enlightenment begin to expose the illusion of rational guarantees at the level of these lived experience.
So in the paintings of David Friedrich, the human figure appears very tiny, fragile in the face of nature. And the French Revolution that was conceived as a triumph of reason and universal principles does not lead to a stable human order. Right now I'm thinking, what's the problem with a revolution that every single time they end with frustration? Maybe we have to change this form. But anyways, coming back. Again, this rational scheme of society proves incapable of guaranteeing humanity. Calculation continues to function, systems keep operating, but the promise of meaning collapses. What's the meaning in that? Okay, we have calculated everything. And it seems that correct reasoning unfortunately no longer protects against catastrophes. And we keep swinging, as you see, along with humanity in between control and unpredictability or / predictability. And this tension culminates in Friedrich Nietzsche and his formulation of the death of God in 1882. And not as a... Theological claim but as a diagnosis of the collapse of absolute foundations of truth and meaning. Right now we understand that interpretation becomes unstable. The author loses final authority and uncertainty evolves from something managed by formulas into this fundamental void because I don't understand what can I trust to, what can support me And around the same time, it's very interesting. Physics delivers a blow to the idea of a fully deterministic world. Quantum physics happens. And while we are right now getting closer and closer to the void, I want to ask you, because sometimes it might be not that pleasant and secure to do that, what relations with uncertainty you have in your art while you're working, creating some works of art, and at the same time in your life? Is it welcomed or is it feared? How do you approach that?
You're an amazing audience. I have already mentioned to everyone. Smart and amazing. I like his own fire. The flame is a little... Interesting. Take me where it wants to take me. Exactly. To be guided sometimes it feels so relaxing Part of the process. Interesting, but how, for example, it might be part of the process? In what percentage? Because sometimes it's all about the percentage that we say, okay, right now I'm ready to be handed in for this uncertainty or I'm still trying to control it because of... Fearing of the results. Usually try to minimize uncertainty in life, but it's fun and I love that because art is this space to rehearse and secure space to rehearse. Very smart. Usually controlled randomness is okay, but I'll find, okay, where it can happen. Controlled randomness. We're going to see that. Cannot imagine my process without it. Beautiful.
So true because that's a part of adventure. Okay. Flow like water.
Well, thank you for your comments. That's amazing that we are on the same page while we are speaking about these swings in between uncertainty and control.
So coming back to quantum physics, and here, obviously, the void is lost. Presented a lot right crew for randomness Happy for that.
So Heisenberg was trying , ". It is impossible, he says, to determine, for example, both the position and momentum of a particle with complete precision, because the more accurately one is measured, the less certain the other becomes.
So the observer is no longer outside the system, neutrally recording facts, as we can imagine as scientists, right? But becomes a part of the process.
So this means that properties don't always exist in a fully form definite state before this observation and reality is no longer entirely ready made in advance, it emerges through this interaction. And this idea is further deepened by Niels Bohr and his principle of complementarity. According to Bohr, quantum phenomena cannot be captured by a single universal model. In some experiments, he says, particles behave like waves but in others they behave like particles. What kind of information shall I extract from that? And these descriptions contradict each other and cannot be applied simultaneously as we understand, yet both of them are necessary. Neither is more true than the other. Do you remember Cornelius Agrippa and I mentioned that we're going to come back to that?
So yeah, saying something which is conceptually very similar. And he was intuitively understanding that, but right now we see it rationally. And at this point, uncertainty is no longer something to be calculated away, it becomes structural. Reality itself starts to resist this single explanation, a single viewpoint, making these references to our first lecture, this single authoritative meaning. In course history, uncertainty never disappears. It shifts from a ritual and phase to calculation and systems as we see right now, as we saw right now, transforming this chance from fear into a very well-designed condition of meaning, authorship, knowledge, and of earning money as well when we were speaking about commodities.
So against these backgrounds of this scientific shift, Cultural sensibility changes. Authority no longer looks like a... Protection, it starts to feel like a threat.
So any voice that claims that it knows how things should be immediately raises suspicion. So this experience of 20th century We remember world wars, gas chambers, mass bombing, atomic weapons. All of that intensifies an existential sense of absurdity. Reality is not obliged to be meaningful. And it is precisely at this point where Dada emerges. Working in Turin during the First World War in a city where James Joyce and Lenin were present at the same time, Hans Harp formulates a radical position. He says that Okay, if the world is absurd, art should not pretend to be meaningful. What's the problem? And the deadliest place chance and play at the center of human activity as an antithesis to war and ideology, because they say if language has served as propaganda and command, it must be broken. If the author claims control, The author might must be removed and here chance becomes a way to liberate art from this violence of imposed meanings. Tristan Tzara proposes making points by cutting words out of newspapers and drawing them at random. Formal instruction in this case replaces this concept of inspiration and the artwork emerges as a result of a procedure and this logic is radicalized by a well-known and right now you can write it in chat Marcel Duchamp because in Trois Stoppages et Talons Duchamp drops these three threads onto canvas and fixes their accidental as new units of measurements.
So what he does here, with this gesture, he shows that the very foundations of order can be arbitrary. It is here that art stops... Representing the world, copying the world, and begins to design its own rules. The world is no longer measured by the standard that we have to put it into a certain phrase, but the standard emerges from the world. And this raises a new question.
So how do we live and act in a world without guarantees? And here that's the moment where the rule appears. In 1960s working with chance changes again this concept how we work with that. If for the Dadaists, chance was primarily a gesture of rapture, a way to break language, authority, the illusion of meaning, then within fluxes it becomes the consequence of the rule fluxes works are built on very strict and extremely simple rules and these minimal actions that i have to do yet the outcomes after these rules they might be totally different every single time because they depend on the context and on the performer on the environment itself and what interested for example john cage was not what he wanted to say, the things that he wanted to express. But what was already sounding in the world does not need interpretation. It is not obliged to be meaningful, expressive. It simply exists. And under the influence of Zen and ancient Chinese divination texts and books, I Ching, Cage begins to use coins or coin tosses as this working method for composition.
So through these tools is what he does. He determines duration, pitches, silences, everything connected to music and the structure of his compositions.
So if for the deadies Chance was an aggressive gesture of destroying reality, of rupture, a way to negate meaning, then Cage does not say there is no meaning. He says, meaning should not come from me. And Chance here becomes or again becomes right now I'm thinking, re-becomes a method of removing authorial control, a way of refusing the ego, everything that we have already discussed at the beginning. And this position reaches its most radical expression in his work 433, The performer comes on stage and then doesn't play a single note. And I think you know this work, But what is happening there? This is not this silence in the literal sense, because the hall fills with coughing, breathing, the creaking of chairs, distant street noise. Music becomes this environment itself. And the logic continues in the event scores developed by Fluxus artist Asioko Ono or George Brecht. Short instructions like, for example, listen to your heartbeat as I put it here on slides, lights imagine, watch it burn. They do not prescribe a result. They initiate an event. Anyone can perform them. Every realization will be different.
So we are not trying to achieve the result. It can be really different. And chance arises as a side effect of life, time, bodily experience, presence, environment. Authorship obviously here dissolves and the work becomes repeatable but never exactly reproducible, so I cannot do the same. And obviously here, while we are speaking about instructions, I want to mention the group Olipo because they approach instructions a little bit differently. Here, instruction is a constraint. They work from this constraint that I have to limit myself. And they start to work from this paradox. What is the paradox? The stricter the rule, the more freedom it generates. And one of the group founders... Raymond Quinault, he creates 100,000 billion poems. They are 10 sonnets in which each line can be combined with any other.
So the author here writes the structure and me as a reader generate the text. So this is already very close to an algorithm. And again, one more member of this group, George Barak writes a void. It is a novel That was written or composed entirely without the letter "e". And the letter "e" in French language, it is the most frequent letter in French. I don't know, it would be... A for English language.
So this becomes an experiment because it raises a question How does thinking reorganize itself under the pressure of the rule? Here I wanted to ask whether you use these aleatoric methods in your own practice, like Dado, maybe restrictions like Lipo.
Somebody has already mentioned the... Fire things? That's something very concrete because you were saying like random events, I do it in art, but not in life. And more precisely, any details? Because today if we're gonna have time we are gonna use some card deck in order to speak With the uncertainty, through this random choice, we're going to use a deck of Marina Abramovich instructions. How else do you tie your hands or use instructions as an artist? - Oops, sorry. What else? Single time while I'm speaking about instructions and restrictions, not instructions. And we are going to speak it in a few lectures about politics and systems and conceptual art. There is a thought that the artist gets even more creative when they have these restrictions and sometimes these restrictions might be dictatorships and in Latin America, for example, it was a common thought that or in Soviet Union that the more political and social restrictions we have the more creative we are.
So is it true or we can be still free and creative for every single time we need these restrictions? It have to be real time. Really on specific tool sizes. Okay. Think about that, we're going to take this question to our chat, our lecture chat, because it's interesting to share in between what kind of methods you use to reconnect with this randomness, maybe apart from algorithmic things or maybe something that we have already discussed in this talk.
So here chance is once again provoked through structure as we saw in this brings us to a crucial shift the artist no longer throws the die personally instead.. What is happening? The artist starts to design a field in which reality itself inevitably throws this tie.
So the artist becomes a programmer of situations, as if it was a director. So the result does not pre-exist, it emerges. As authority loses legitimacy, art replaces inspiration with constraint and authorship with systems and here we treat chance not as an error but as an inbuilt parameter. The key shift of the mid-20th century, as I mentioned right now, is that the randomness starts to be as a source of knowledge, not only like an error or inbuilt parameter, but as a source of knowledge about the systems itself, where this randomness is being activated, if it's possible to activate this randomness.
So this change emerges out of the deep scientific transformation taking place in 40s and 50s, Cybernetics appear as a sign of control and self-regulation in complex systems. Later in the future lectures, we are going to speak a little bit more about cybernetics, but I cannot resist mentioning it here as well because it's really connected.
So from machines to living organisms and social processes, And its core insight is that no system can ever be fully controlled. Control is only possible through feedback, and feedback only exists when a system deviates from expected behavior.
So we have to deviate in order to investigate, in order to research the system. And error in this framework is no longer a failure. It becomes this information.
So through deviation, the system learns what is happening and adjusts its actions. And what we understand here is that randomness and instability are no longer enemies and are no longer opposites of order. They are conditions.
So control is no longer imagined as this elimination of uncertainty, but as the capacity to work with it. The principle that we were speaking right now, this reconnecting with systems, is really important for artists and it is translated into visual by Vera Molnar and he told me that you have a These warm feelings towards her because she works with what she calls manual algorithm. Bunch cards, table of random numbers, grids, repetitions and her early works of 60s are essentially programming with a pencil. Obviously later she begins using computers but It is the same, so the logic remains the same. What she deliberately dismantles is this illusion of the perfect machine. Moeller introduces the concept of the machine, so the imaginary machine. Unlike an actual technical device, this machine exists as a conceptual model, so it doesn't have any kind of physical representation. That's a set of rules, repetitions, transformations that can be executed without a computer. Bohler's imaginary machine is a visual system capable of... Observing what is being deviated. Her idea of controlled chance functions as something as an artistic equivalent of this cybernetic feedback. Minimal errors, microscopic shifts, slight inaccuracies, They do not bring the system, but they make the system visible. Everything that we have already mentioned, right? The algorithm begins to respond to its own deviations like a self-regulating system for which instability is a condition of functioning. And almost simultaneously, this information theory develops. And every single time while we were speaking about Vera, we connected to that. But... There is something crucial that is happening there because this distinction between signal and noise that used to exist, we see that it is changing because in classical thinking noise is completely demonized. It is something that interferes with meaning and must be eliminated. But information theory shows that the noise can never be fully removed. Because it is always present in the channel. And more importantly, without noise, the signal itself cannot be measured. Noise stops being this evil and becomes something that the system must work with and sometimes a source of this additional information.
So at this point, chance is no longer what threatens the system, it is what allows the system to be known. In this context, at this point, the intersection of systems thinking, the rejection of representation and this new understanding of form as a process, Arte Generativo emerges in Argentina.
So this generative art, appears at first in Argentina in 1960, artists like Eduardo McIntyre and Miguel Angel Vidal, I'm just controlling myself not to continue lecture in Spanish while pronouncing all these names in Spanish. They published the manifesto of Arte Generativo and present the movement in an exhibition of Valeria Pelser. And in this manifest, they criticize op art They are writing to me, well... - Yeah. In the manifest, they criticize art for producing... My god, I cannot do that because... Bye. - What they demand instead is that the artwork should not be the result, but this.. Possible visible operation of assistance.
So the viewer should not experiment or experience a visual trick but a process, something that can be mentally reconstructed by the person who sees that. The very existence of a manifesto here is crucial and that's why I'm speaking a lot about the manifesto because the artists are not simply using procedures, they are articulating procedure as a method and insisting on a new language for it. And this logic appears in this first exhibition in the gallery because they decide to display works in series rather than isolated, very independent pieces or objects because they want to show that Not like here is the artwork, but here is a range of possible states and each piece appears as one realization of the rule. Their generativity is manual but rigorously procedural, so the artist defines the system of actions but does not control specific form. Through this repetition, displacements, interference, overlay, These elements begin to behave like a system, producing optical vibrations, illusions of depth and movement. And in 1967, and I think that you're waiting for that, Sol LeWitt addresses the same problem as MacIntyre: the rejection of the image in favor of the system. But on a different level and that's why I want you to understand the difference between them. McIntyre investigates how a system generates form from within the visual field itself observing how rules unfold into optical effects. Lvi-Hyt by contrast delegates form entirely so the system is transferred to executors, to space, to bodily and institutional constraints. Lvi-Hyt formulates Thank you for your comments about Buenos Aires. Lvi-formulates this position in his essay "Paragraphs on Conceptual Art: The Idea Becomes a Machine that Produces Art" because he designs a system that then operates on its own. For his wall drawings, Lvi-writes instructions to be executed by assistants or museum staff, draw 10,000 lines of random lengths, for example, and then He continues: "So he does not decide where a line will be, what it looks like, how it exactly falls. That is defined or determined by the performer or sometimes by the physical limitations of the space. And at this point it is important to clarify two things.
So the first concern, why it matters to talk about the Eduardo McIntyre alongside with Levit. Because otherwise, if we are not going to do that, we risk falling into a very simplified narrative where instructions come first, then ideas and then systems. And what it means? It means that the visual form appears here as something secondary. And this is largely an American French version of the art history where form seems to always follow text. And the artwork appears as the execution of this linguistic written concept. McIntyre solves the same problem, but without instructions. He demonstrates that it is possible to think systemically to work with rules without relying on text, without relying on language or this explicit derivative, with explicit directives. In this sense, generative art does not emerge from instructions as such, it emerges from working with form itself. And generative art, we can say that at its core, thinks in rules that are embodied in forms, lines, modules, transformations, rather than in words. And that's why I felt that was important to mention here. The second nuance, and... Here there is a concern that we have to understand this subtle but crucial difference in between the instructions used by Levitt and those by Fluxus because you can say Polini would have already spoken about instructions way to come back to that right. His instructions, Levitt's instructions, they function as a mechanism for precise transmission of idea execution may vary, but it must remain a correct realization of the underlying algorithm. Even when Levit introduces this randomness, like lines of random length, this randomness is delegated and strictly bounded by the system. And in this sense, the instruction operates as an algorithm and the author becomes this architect of a space of possible states. But in Fluxes, The instruction does not realize an idea. It initiates an event. Event scores, they do not imply a correct outcome. They're not evaluated based on fidelity to this original intention. There is no proper execution.
So despite their surface similarity, the difference is very important. LeWitt's instructions is an algorithm oriented towards reproducibility. Of a system and fluxes instructions is a trigger for action. Emergent VC constraints. Right now we're going to speak a little bit about that while we're going to talk about different kinds of generative arts and I will remember this question to come back at the end of our lecture if I'm not going to answer it before.
So from Molnar to digital generative art it becomes really clear That procedure is the key feature of this, and I don't want to say generative art, generative thinking, because it describes how something may happen. And crucially, chance does not cancel the rule, it operates inside. This is why generative art is often described as unpredictability within constraints. And answering a little bit your question. It's important to note that not all randomness is the same and that's why I failed to put it into the slides in order to distinguish what kind of randomness we have. Eleothoric randomness there's a pure chance like a throw of a die that we have already mentioned in different aspects where a single random act directly determines Okay, interesting.
Yeah. So it determines the outcome. The logic here is that I don't choose Chance chooses instead of me. Stochastic. Stochastic processes, how do they work? They work with probability distributions. For example, you may say a line may deviate But most often by one or two degrees, more rarely by 10 and almost never by 90.
So you here understand that is more probable and that is less probable. The randomness is shaped to say that you're trying to control it. You don't like it a lot, so you're like, okay, I'm gonna put some rules. Pseudorandomness is randomness generated by an algorithm rather than by true chaos.
So If the same initial parameter is given, the result will be exactly the same every single time. Emergence here is different because here no random choice is added at all, yet the result appears unpredictable because the system is too complex. Not because we introduced it, but because interactions within the system become opaque.
So this leads to the key point: generative art is almost never about chaos. It's about the boundary between control and unpredictability. Mid 20th century, System thinking reframes noise as knowledge as we saw, instability as a condition of order, and the artwork as the visible execution of a rule rather than a finished example. Right now we can step by step approach with all this vocabulary, all these understandings to generative art. Because all of these examples from Vera Molnar to Sol LeWitt and Fluxus, they show that generative art is not defined by style, by technology. Or by historical period, it is defined by mode of thinking. And every single time I'm going to repeat today that it's all about how I perceive and how I think about that, the way of thinking. The artist does not design a form, but a process. However, processes themselves, they can be organized in very different ways.
That's why I decided to create different blocks of how we are approaching this generative art. And I felt that it makes more sense to distinguish not like schools or movements, but types of systems artists work with. For example, procedural generative art operates through procedures, steps, instructions, and actions unfolding over time.
So the key question here is, What sequence of actions does the artist set in motion? Algorithmic generative art works with formalized rules, repetitions, transformations and code Or now I'm thinking maybe mental code as well. The key question here, what rules govern the form? Seller, Automator or Agent-based systems, they rely on local rules, interactions between elements or the emergence of global patterns. The key question here is how does complex behavior arise from simple rules? The next thing is data-driven generative art.
So it treats data as material, transforming the streams or then visualizing data, abstracting data. The key question here, what happens when the world itself becomes this input of data. And right now, I think it's a pretty critical question nowadays. Story. Hybrid systems, they include NFTs and blockchain-based works. And the key question here is, What happens when social and economic rules are embedded directly into the generative processes?
So we're gonna speak about each of them in more detail, so no preoccupations here, and I'm going to show different kinds of examples because While speaking about something that is so abstract, it's better to look at some examples and see how this thought The artistic and scientific suite has been evolving. When computers and the graphic plotter appear, the system stops being imaginary manual, so it becomes an executable machine. And we see appear a visual factory of variations. One algorithm definitely may create different kinds of realizations. And at this point, we can say that algorithmic generative art begins to take shape.
And then like all these procedural practices that we have already seen, where chance often plays a central role here, Form is generated by purely deterministic rules. In these procedural systems, the work remains open and sensitive to execution, but in algorithmic systems, same data always produces the same results. And one of the earliest examples and symbols of this shift is George or Georg Nees. I have already searched for the correct pronunciation.
Somebody says that Nees, not Nees. So, I'm sorry if you know how to pronounce it correctly, I will be really happy if you're gonna text it to me. His shorter is a demonstration of how order begins to loosen from within a rule.
So the grid structure remains intact but the algorithm introduces random deviations that increase as the composition unfolds. At the same time, Friedrich Nocke develops another model of early algorithmic composition. His homage shows how the image is not a picture as we used to think about that, but a trace of a computable process that can be repeated, compared logically. And what matters here is that the image is only the evidence that happened, that the procedure ran. And this is why transparency, repeatability and reproducibility become central values. Form here is very necessary because it follows from the rules. Algorithmic art asserts that complexity can arise not from This random gesture, as we have already seen, but from the strict repetitions of simple operations. And the image, as I already said, is a print out of a procedure. The logic is not hidden. We see it, we can reproduce it. And unlike art based on chance, where results cannot be repeated, algorithmic art insists on this reproducibility. Run the same code again and you're going to have the same result. A central mechanism here is recursion. It is a situation in which a rule is applied not once, but repeatedly to the result of its own operation. In other words, The system does not invent new instructions. It keeps executing the same rule again and again. This is how this fractal structures, beautiful fractal structures, here we can say the mathematics is so amazing, aesthetically it's so beautiful. Each part resembles the whole, regardless of scale.
So these forms enter art from mathematics, as you can understand. The Mandelbrot set is defined by a simple formula that constrains no image, no aesthetic intention, yet when iterated recursively, It produces an infinitely complex and visually rich structure, and here it's unavoidable consequence of the rule being applied to itself. Roman Wierowska extends these procedural logics by introducing recursive growth as a source of form. While artists like Friedrich Nocke demonstrated that an image could function as a trace of computable procedure, Wierowska shows that or what happens when such a procedure is allowed to develop over multiple iterations. To achieve these, Verhoevsky uses L-systems. They are like formal real writing systems developed by biologist Lyndon Mayer and in L-systems symbols are repeatedly written according to fixed rules. On the micro level, the system operates on very abstract symbols. But on the micro level, these recursive rewritings produce these branching structures that resemble leaves and growth and nature that we have already seen, right? In plot of work such as the Garden of Bands, the compositions resemble plots. Yet their organic quality is the outcome of a recursive procedure. We are not speaking about depicting nature. Form does not depict nature and that's very important. It emerges the way nature emerges and through this repeated application of the same law at different scales. And that's so mind-blowing because right now we don't understand who we are, where we live and... Maybe we can be de-fragmented completely. Manfred Mohr, instead of using this recursion to simulate growth or organic development, uses it to systematically explore the space of possible states of a formal system. His work is built on extremely restrictive elements, lines, angles, cubes, By minimizing the visual vocabulary, Moore makes the underlying logics of the system fully legible.
So in his practice, recursion no longer produces organic expansion, but logical exhaustion. So the same rule is applied repeatedly, and there is something similar in between these. And do you remember linguistic experiments of Aleppo that we discussed? Instruction as a constraint that allowed to explore limits. And that's beautiful, but interesting to think about that. This logic is later extended in a different register through the development of noise functions, and most notably, of Perlin noise. And Here I just put this thing so that you can distinguish in between that we were saying that the Roscoe rule grows more the rule exhaust itself every single time asking about the limits or researching the limits and probably noise the rule disguises itself as a chaos because These functions, like Perlin nodes, were designed to model natural irregularities such as clouds, water, terrain. Although their output appears chaotic, the underlying process is fully deterministic. And that's the moment where mathematics is so close to philosophy because If we think about our life every single time, we're like my God, that's chaos. And what we see as chaos. Mathematics, science shows us it's not chaos, it's the problem of your perception. It has order that you cannot, we cannot perceive.
Well, coming back to art. What looks irregular is the result of layered mathematically controlled variations.
So the artist or engineer or artist-engineer, artist/engineer controls the system through parameters. And here recursion and iteration are no longer used to generate form directly, but to modulate deviations within a stable structure. This principle finds an artistic realization, obviously, in the work of Jared Torbell, a pioneer of algorithmic design in the 2000s. In his substrate series, Torvald applies multi-octave pearly notes to bass grid. Each octave introduces variation at a different scale and these layers accumulate into complex structures reminiscent of Coral mineral growth, crystalline formations. And these irregularities are not random. They are not random accidents. They are deterministic deviations generated by algorithms. Chaos was pretending to be chaos. Cellular Automator. And... It takes generative thinking one step further to say that. If algorithmic generative art show that strict rules can produce form, cellular automata show that rules can produce behavior.
So time enters the system and the work is no longer a static object. It becomes this world unfolding. A cellular automation or automaton starts from an extremely simple setup. It is a grid of cells, each with a minimal state. For example, alive or dead, on and off, active or active. Empty. Yourself falls a local rule and it looks only at immediate neighbors and updates not because of supreme power or control, but updates because of these immediate neighbors. No cell has knowledge of the whole. There is no central control, no global plan, no view from the above. Hello, our previous lecture. And yet...
Like shaders, exactly. And yet, from these microscopic rules, Sorry, from these microscopic rules, we have macroscopic structure emerge.
So this principle is called emergence, this global behavior arising from local interactions. And here there is off top and fun fact. Gestalt psychology describes the same intuition from the perspective of perception. The whole is not reducible to the sum of its parts. What cellular automata demonstrate computationally, Gestalt theory articulated experientially.
So emergence becomes fundamental not only for generative art obviously, but for understanding ecosystems, economies, neural processes and social dynamics. Huge field for exploration. From different places, we're going to one destination of knowing from different areas of our life. Thank you. And the description of psychic archetypes by totally Maybe you will like my afterword. That's beautiful that you're mentioning it. In 1970, mathematician John Conway introduces the most famous seller automaton, the game of life. The system operates on a grid and follows just three rules. A living cell dies if it has too few neighbors, a living cell dies if it has too many neighbors, and a dead cell becomes alive if it has exactly three neighbors. Yet when these three rules, or these rules unfold over time, Unexpected entities appear: stable structure oscillators, moving forms, self-replicating patterns.
So some travel across the grid as if they possess their own life, but they don't. Soon mathematicians discovered that the game of life is computationally universal, so meaning that it can simulate any computer. And this is a philosophical shock because behavior resembling life Once attributed to intention, intelligence, and biological essence, turns out to be possible without author and without plan. Is there any God over there? No. They say no design, no goal, only rule and repetition. My God, that's kind of an existential crisis right now. Artists are here, immediately they recognize this i-thetic potential of these systems because cellular automata visualize time, growth, mutation and collapse... I'm going to come back to this. - James message. Later.
So this introduces a new artistic imagination that form is temporal, not static. Composition is replaced by growth. The artwork is a process, not an object. Meaning emerges rather than being imposed. And the artist here relinquishes global control. They define initial conditions and local behavior, but they do not dictate the final result. Casey Ries, co-creator of Processing, pioneer Pioneer's Emergent Systems, in his early project process series, he defines simple behavioral rules for elements that interact locally. Form emerges from interaction rather than being pre-designed, extending this raw score recursion into living time. Jonathan Maccaba works with complex multistate cellular automata in which color itself functions as a state. All of these systems unfold, they generate forms that resemble biological tissues, corals and cellular structures. And every pixel responds only to its immediate neighbors. And this approach connects us to Alan Turing's paper, "The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis". In that text, Turing proposed this mathematical explanation for how complex biological patterns can emerge from initially uniform conditions, how it may happen. He demonstrates that emergence is not a metaphor borrowed from biology, but a shared structural principle. Data-driven generative art.
So as digital technologies evolve, the focus shifts. If cellular automator asks about What can emerge from simple rules? Data-driven art asks a different question. How can existing reality be perceived differently? And here the system is no longer autonomous. Its fuel is data. Measurements, archives, streams, records. And these shifts changes the role of time. In Celera Automator, time is internal. Each step transforms the world automatically. From within. In data-driven practices, time is often a property of the data itself. Time is already recorded and the artwork doesn't generate it. It scrolls, it can do whatever it wants, remix, filter, reveal.
So time shifts from generated to material and authorship, as we can suppose, shifts as well. In Celera Automator, the artist gives up control and accepts your price. And here we are, I trust in uncertainty, but in data dreaming art, control partially returns and the artist chooses which data to show and how to map it, which relationship to emphasize. And there is less systemic surprise and we're saying, okay, I'm not there for adventure, but I have more responsibility of controlling, of translating everything that is going on inside. One of the first to understand this data visualization as an artistic practice is and was Gerrit Torp. His projects work with airline routes, social networks, turning databases into visual systems that reveal these hidden structures. He often describes data visualization as a bridge between the analytical and the poetic. And I remember one of you have already mentioned the paetic of generative art or a school that is called something like that and while I was preparing presentation I remembered that.
So yeah, he shows that it is the bridging between this analytical and the paetic. Data are not illustrated, they're reorganized in new modes of thinking. In Robert Hodding's practice, and we saw him in all the subtitle slides, I love what he does, the environment plays an active role because he often works with environmental processes such as rivers, flowers, sound, natural dynamics, yet he doesn't represent nature visually. Instead, he works with data generated by the environment, translating these signals into behavior of generative system. What enters the work here is not the river itself, but it's rather its velocity, fluctuations and in this sense nature functions as a core creative force but only through translation. As the opposite pole stands Ryoji Ikeda, And where anodal liquefies data, it can create, sorry, Ta-da! singing about Yeah. I changed because yesterday we were speaking about Anadol a little bit with Heifer, so I decided not to mention him today. But yeah, anyways, and I started comparing. I saw that I have this slide there.
So yeah, at the opposite, Paul will see that his works of Ikeda consist of pure numerical structures and for example, what kind of structures? High frequency sounds, flickering light, grids, synchronized streams of digits, binary sequences. He confronts the viewer with their scale, speed, precision. It is an aesthetic of the limit where data are experienced as something sublime and almost unimaginable. Unbearable, right? And in all these cases that we have seen right now, the art ceases to be a single object and becomes a field of possible states. And last but not least, hybrid or on-chain generative art. By early 2020, generative art reaches a point where the question of system autonomy becomes radicalized. If earlier the algorithm always existed as something external to the artwork, a file, a program, an instruction, with the emergence of on-chain generative art, the code becomes the very site of the work's existence. This becomes possible thanks to blockchain technology and on platforms such as Artblocks and FXHash, Founded by Eric Calderon, the artwork algorithm is written directly onto the blockchain. Rather than existing as a file stored on a server, the code becomes independent of the artist, of gallery, of any museum or institution, and it can be altered retroactively. Artblocks established this curated and canonical model helping make on-chain generative art legible to institutions and the art market, but FX operates as a more open and experimental environment.
So together these platforms demonstrate that on-chain generative art is not defined by a single iothetic or market logic, but by an infrastructure in which autonomous systems can exist and act. And what is crucial here is that in this model, one does not purchase a finished form until the moment of minting the specific image does not exist in any form. The collector acquires the right to activate the system and at the moment of transaction, the algorithm receives a random seed and produces a concrete realization for the first time.
So this form appears once and can never be repeated. And then this way, all the rhythmic autonomy is pushed to its limits because the artist can no longer intervene in the process after the code is published. The algorithm lives its own life and it executes itself, archives itself, authenticates itself, and there is this continuation of Sol LeWitt's idea of the work as a machine that makes art. But now this machine is not only authentically autonomous, it is legally independent from its author. Autonomy here becomes monetized as well. And at the same time, on-chain generative art differs fundamentally from those data-driven practices and artificial intelligence because there is no external data set being translated into form. There is no... Learning, prediction or adaptation. The algorithm doesn't know the world, and doesn't model the future.
So it simply executes predefined rules and this complexity is not this cognitive, if we may use this adjective here, but procedural. So blockchain does not merely add a technological layer to generate a part, it transforms this ontology because the artwork ceases to be an object that must be stored or protected, it becomes an autonomous event. Fixed within a very distributed system. Generative art returns to its foundational question: what does form mean without an answer?
So if in cellular automated autonomy was a philosophical experiment, in algorithmic art we saw it was an aesthetic principle, then in on-chain generative art autonomy becomes a condition of the work existence itself. Not image, not gesture, not interpretation, but a law that is launched once and remains in the world Let's say forever. Let's suppose forever. Tyler helps work and everything how he envisions his work function as a manifesto of on-chain algorithmic painting if you dance with the balance between this control and uncertainty is really important because the algorithm is tightly structured but the parameter space is so rich that each realization appears unique and here on on-chain logic becomes a way to recover a sense of this handmade gesture without a hand and later we're going to see even more of that. If hops with line and this movement works with this paint like movements or lines or handmade things. Chernyak explores radical minimalism of the rules because inside of the series "Ringers" he demonstrates how extremely simple conditions to say, for example, rotation layering a limited set of forms can produce complex and almost architectural compositions. Chernek consistently illustrates that One of the core principles of generative thinking, one more time I'm going to repeat them, the stricter the rules, the richer the space of possible forms. If Chernyak demonstrates how extreme formal restrictions can produce this clarity, William Mepon explores sensitivity. And Mepon's practice is built on procedural systems that generate grids, fields, structures. And he shows how these generative systems can be expressive without becoming gestures, human gestures. Because we feel and emotion emerges here and not...
Like from behavior of the system, which feels so strange. And here it's not that cold or mechanical. And maybe sometimes we are doubting whether it was a machine or it was a human being.
So it is responsive. But never conscious or not yet conscious. There are lots of folks here. Emily Zier's work confronts the question of authorship, and her generative system often evokes handwriting, drawing, calligraphic movements, And here we see how we can associate all these movements with human body, with individual expression, and these gestures are produced by code. Her work demonstrates how this procedural autonomy can still produce work that feels deeply human and without returning any control to artists.
So generative art is a way of thinking in systems where algorithms become executable. Artworks exist as a field of disposable states and meaning emerges as we saw through this interaction, execution rather than expression. And a little bit of my final thoughts, including after all of our lecture, .
It's important to address a concern that often arises when we talk about generative systems or algorithms. The fear that these technologies will erase the author, replacing human intention, creativity, responsibility with automation, But what we are actually witnessing is this redistribution of authorship, the artist who defines the rules, the system that executes them, chance that intervenes through randomness, the environment maybe as well, that makes execution possible. And every single time while we speak about fear, we should understand that we fear everything that is new for us. But in this sense, contemporary generative practices, and that is what I wanted to show with this lecture, These practices, they don't push us into a radically new condition. They return us to a very old one. And at the beginning of the lecture, we spoke about moments where humans created not as isolated authors, but in dialogue with their environment. Do you remember Caves of Altamira, where the rock surface, the irregularities of the wall, the available pigments, the light of fire, I don't know, the movement of bodies.
Experience that we are translated into different technological contexts, yes, but it's not that new. And throughout history and throughout our lecture, we saw how these artistic practices have continuously swung between control and uncertainty, between a clearly defined author and collaboration with other forces, whether we name it God, nature, noise, algorithm, whatever.
So what changes is not the existence of these forces, but how much agency we grant them. And that's why I asked you in the middle of the lecture, how much unpredictability do you allow to your practices? Right. So, Do we have... A little time for afterwards or shall we go directly to questions? Let's.
Haiver â € | 01:19:44
Go directly to questions. I think that's the right call. I have a couple just to bring us to a close here. If you want to Do you have more slides you wanted to show before you finish?
Polina Rud | 01:19:58
I have enough to worry, so I do not know. I think that we can discuss several things and Yeah.
Haiver â € | 01:20:09
I mean, so I love that you ended on this note that creation is this co-creative force with the environment and the things around us. I mean, that ties into the Dadaists that you were talking about earlier. You get Hans slash Jean Arp, who would tear pieces of paper and drop them onto a, you know, To form a collage and it's like what is the wind that day is the window open. How is the light playing. How was the structure of the paper from the printing press or from the press that may turn the tree in and the pulp into paper, all of those interactions in that moment or I love the, I was at the Generative Art Summit a couple years ago in Berlin and Frieder Nacke spoke, one of the godfathers of generative art, and he said on the stage in a very mic drop moment, all art is generative art, which is It was quite a... I don't want to say offensive statement, but it certainly threw a lot of people for a loop in that moment. And so I love that you brought it full circle to that at the end as well, that all of this work is co-creative in some way and does involve this chance and this randomness The last thread I wanted to pull on that you talked about was the contrast between the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and the I Ching principle. Because the Heisenberg uncertainty principle It talks about revealing that the universe is not strictly deterministic and That there's this chance built into it. And one of the things that John Cage in his embrace of Zen Buddhism and the use of the I Ching for making music by flipping coins and using this very complicated time consuming system like it was not quick in any way. The I Ching is all about Finding what are the currents of the universe itself to draw out those unseen patterns and make them visible to say if the world seems random and chaotic, then by using the system that seems to use random chaotic forces. In fact, we reveal structure and order out of it. And I think for the generative artists in the room, I really love the sentence you finished on there about On-chain generative art is not an object, but an autonomous event. And I really wonder what it would do for the generative artists in our session, but artists generally speaking here, since all art is generative on some level, what would it do to our practice to think of what we're making as an event rather than as an object.
Polina Rud | 01:22:54
Loved everything. And in particular, I want to share it with you that yesterday we had a talk, a really profound talk with Heber and his expertise in generative art. And well, if right now we're taking into account that all art is generative, but yeah, anyway. Thank you for sharing that. Thank.
Haiver â € | 01:23:15
You. Yeah. Imagine my delight yesterday flipping through Polina's slides, having only given her a few themes to pull on and discover so many friends and familiar faces here to share and essentially bring us all to a level playing field in terms of what we're about to do on our cohorts together. All right. That wasn't a question I shared. I think that's all the time we have. If you want to just finish with your afterword then, and then we'll call it a day.
Polina Rud | 01:23:38
Yeah, we can do that. Or I brought a deck of Marina Abramovich with some instructions or we can do it in our art lecture chats because we can just use these parts of training, how we're interacting with chance and having some instructions from Marina Abramovich if you're going to have any kind of question.
I mean your personal question about your artistic practice or about anything that you cannot find an answer to. So we can ask this Marina Abramovich deck or you can leave questions here and then I can just draw a card for you and send you photos into our chat. I don't know how shall we do that.
Haiver â € | 01:24:25
Let's do it in our lecture chat after we sign off. I'd like to make sure we finish on time as often as possible. But do you want to just give a sentence or two of instruction of how this could work in our lecture chat?
Polina Rud | 01:24:38
- For example, we can find inside of us a question. I don't know about our practice or how I can approach. What I do or about randomness or about anything you feel.
Yeah, it's a kind of a tarot deck but from Marina Abramovich method that she teaches. So, and then you just draw a card and here are instructions what you have to do because they are not like answers that I truly like that they are not answers. They're like instructions and it's really connected to our lecture right now. What do you have to do in order to have an answer, in order to find this answer.
So that's why maybe you can leave some questions in our chat and I'm going to draw a card for you and then send a picture of what you have to do and then you will text us how did it feel.
Haiver â € | 01:25:30
That sounds perfect. Do you have an idea of the types of questions you'd like people to ask for this process?
Polina Rud | 01:25:36
I think anything connected with your art practice because for example I saw questions How do I interact with the work of another artist, for example? How shall I appropriate some details or figures that I really like but then they don't match my artistic experience so it's might be a question any kind of questions that you have regarding the arts the essence of art how do you create art what kind of maybe stalemates you're experimenting right now or you're in the search of a new idea so big variety of questions and then I made a record.
Haiver â € | 01:26:21
Amazing.
Polina Rud | 01:26:22
Just to have these instructions from Marina Bromwich.
Haiver â € | 01:26:26
Yeah, I'm so excited to see those picture questions and the pictures start showing up in the art lecture discussion. So bring your questions about your own practice things you would like to hear back from randomness and chance. What's the message you need to hear today? And to figure out how to interpret that into your practice. That's our session. Thank you again to Dr. Paulina Rood for this great and very rich lecture. We're so lucky to have you with us, helping us think deeply and reframe how we're thinking about our practices, especially those of us that have been working in this particular discipline for a long time. The next time we will see many of you is on Sunday. We have our first reading discussion group. If you didn't see already, there is a PDF and an MP3 of the first chapter of John Berger's book, Ways of Seeing. It is extremely short. I read very slowly, like half as fast as my wife. It's one of my great pains in life.
So I love an MP3. So I generated that with an AI generated voice.
So if you want to listen to it instead of read, please do that. Otherwise, give it a read and we'll do some breakout sessions on Sunday. Otherwise, we'll see you in the chat. Have a good week, all.
Polina Rud | 01:27:37
Bye-bye. Thank you.