WAYS OF
SEEING
JOHN BERGER

Seeing comes before words. The child looks
and recognizes before it can speak.
But there is also another sense in which seeing
comes before words. It is seeing which establishes our place
in the surrounding worid; we explain that worid with words,
but words can never undo the fact that we are surrounded by
it. The relation between what we see and what we know is
never settled.

The Surrealist painter Magritte commented
on this always-present gap between words and seeing in
a painting called The Key of Dreams.
The way we see things is affected by what we

Note to the reader
Published by the British Broadcasting Corporation. 35 Marylebone High Street, London, W1 M 4AA
ISBN 978 0 563 122449
and by
PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England
Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Books Canadá Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canadá M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South África) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South África
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices' 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL. England
www.penguin.com
ISBN 978 0 14 013515 2
First published in Great Britain by the British Broadcasting Corporation and Penguin Books Ltd 1972
40 39 38
First published in the United States of America by The Viking Press (A Richard Seaver Book) 1973
Published in Penauin Books in the United States of America 1977
Copyright in all countries of the International Copyright Union 1972 by Penguin Books Ltd
All rights reserved
Printed ¡n China
Set in Monophoto Univers
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject
to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser

This book has been made by f ive of us. Our
starting point was some of the ideas contained in the televisión
series Ways of Seeing. We have tried to extend and elabórate
these ideas. They have inf luenced not only what we say but
also how we have set about trying to say it. The form of the
book is as much to do with our purpose as the arguments
contained within it.
The book consists of seven numbered essays.
They can be read in any order. Four of the essays use words
and images, three of them use only images. These purely
pictoriai essays (on ways of seeing women and on various
contradictory aspects of the tradition of the oil painting) are
intended to raise as many questions as the verbal essays.
Sometimes in the pictoriai essays no information at all is given
about the images reproduced because it seemed to us that
such information might distract from the points being made.
In all cases, however, this information can be found in the List
of Works Reproduced which is printed at the end of the book.
None of the essays pretends to deal with more
than certain aspects of each subject: particuiariy those aspects
thrown into relief by a modern historical consciousness.
Our principal aim has been to start a process of questioning.

1

Seeing comes before words. The child looks and
recognizes before it can speak.

But there is also another sense in which seeing
comes before words. It is seeing which establishes our place
in the surrounding world; w e explain that world with words,
but words can never undo the fact that we are surrounded by
it. The relation between what we see and what we know is
never settled. Each evening we see the sun set. We know
that the earth is turning away f rom it. Yet the knowledge, the
explanation, never quite fits the sight. The Surrealist painter
Magritte commented on this always-present gap between
words and seeing in a painting called The Key of Dreams.

notice how the faculty of touch is like a static, limited form of
sight.) We never look at just one thing; we are always looking
at tne relation between things and ourselves. Our visión is
continually active, continually moving, continually holding
things in a circle around itself, constituting what is present
to us as we are.
Soon after we can see, we are aware that we can
also be seen. The eye of the other combines with our own eye
to make it fully credible that we are part of the visible world.
If we accept that we can see that hill over there,
we propose that from that hill we can be seen. The reciprocal
nature of visión is more fundamental than that of spoken
dialogue. And often dialogue is an attempt to verbalize this an attempt to explain how, either metaphorically or literally,
"you see things', and an attempt to discover how 'he sees
things'.
In the sense in which we use the word in this
book, all images are man-made.

The way we see things is affected by what we
know or what w e believe. In the Middle Ages when men
believed in the physical existence of Hell the sight of fire must
have meant something different from what it means today.
Nevertheless their idea of Hell owed a lot to the sight of fire
consuming and the ashes remaining - as well as to their
experience of the pain of burns.
When in love, the sight of the beloved has a
completeness which no words and no embrace can match :
a completeness which only the act of making love can
temporarily accommodate.
Yet this seeing which comes before words, and
can never be quite covered by them, is not a question of
mechanically reacting to stimuli. (It can only be thought of in
this way if one isolates the small part of the process which
concerns the eye's retina.) We only see what we look at. To
look is an act of choice. As a result of this act, what we see is
brought within our reach - though not necessarily within
arm's reach. To touch something is to sitúate oneself in
relation to it. (Cióse your eyes, move round the room and

An image is a sight which has
been recreated or reproduced. It is an appearance, or a set of
appearances, which has been detached from the place and time

in which it first made its appearance and preserved - for a few
moments or a few centuries. Every image embodies a way of
seeing. Even a photograph. For photographs are not, as is
often assumed, a mechanical record. Every time we look at a
photograph, w e are aware, however slightly, of the
photographer selecting that sight from an infinity of other
possible sights. This is true even in the most casual family
snapshot. The photographer's way of seeing is reflected in his
choice of subject. The painter's way of seeing is reconstituted
by the marks he makes on the canvas or paper. Yet, although
every image embodies a way of seeing, our perception or
appreciation of an image depends also upon our own way of
seeing. ( I t may be, for example, that Sheila is one figure among
twenty; but for our own reasons she is the one we have eyes
for.)

Images were first made to conjure up the
appearances of something that was absent. Gradually it
became evident that an image could outlast what it
represented; it then showed how something or somebody had
once looked — and thus by implication how the subject had
once been seen by other people. Later still the specific visión
of the image-maker was also recognized as part of the record.
An image became a record of how X had seen Y. This was the
result of an increasing consciousness of individuality,
accompanying an increasing awareness of history. It would be
rash to try to date this last development precisely. But
certainly in Europe such consciousness has existed since the
beginning of the Renaissance.
No other kind of relie or text from the past can
offer such a direct testimony about the world which
surrounded other people at other times. In this respect
images are more precise and richer than literature. To say this
is not to deny the expressive or imaginative quality of art,
treating it as mere documentary evidence; the more imaginative
the work, the more profoundly it allows us to share the
artist's sxperience of the visible.
10

Yet when an image is presented as a work of art,
the way people look at it is affected by a whole series of learnt
assumptions about art. Assumptions concerning:
Beauty
Truth
Genius
Civilization
Form
Status
Taste, etc.
Many of these assumptions no longer accord with
the world as it is. (The world-as-it-is is more than puré
objective fact, it includes consciousness.) Out of true with the
present, these assumptions obscure the past. They mystify
rather than clarify. The past is never there waiting to be
discovered, to be recognized for exactly what it is. History
always constitutes the relation between a present and its past.
Consequently fear of the present leads to mystification of the
past. The past is not for living i n ; it is a well of conclusions
from which w e draw in order to act. Cultural mystification of
the past entails a double loss. Works of art are made
unnecessarily remote. And the past offers us fewer
conclusions to complete in action.
When we 'see' a landscape, we sitúate ourselves
in it. If we 'saw' the art of the past, we would sitúate
ourselves in history. When we are prevented from seeing it,
we are being deprived of the history which belongs to us.
Who benefits from this deprivation? In the end, the art of the
past is being mystified because a privileged minority is
striving to invent a history which can retrospectively justify
the role of the ruling classes, and such a justification can
no longer make sense in modern terms. And so, inevitably, it
mystifies.
Let us consider a typical example of such
mystification. A two-volume study was recently published on
Frans Hals. It is the authoritative work to date on this painter.
As a book of specialized art history it is no better and no
worse than the average.
11

of over eighty, was destitute. Most of his life he had been in
debt. During the winter of 1664, the year he began painting
these pictures, he obtained three loads of peat on public
charity, otherwise he would have f rozen to death. Those who
now sat for him were administrators of such public charity.
The author records these facts and then explicitly
says that it would be incorrect to read into the paintings any
criticism of the sitters. There is no evidence, he says, that
Hals painted them in a spirit of bitterness. The author
considers them, however, remarkable works of art and
explains why. Here he writes of the Regentesses:
Each woman speaks to us of the human condition with
equal ¡mportance. Each woman stands out with equal
clarity against the enormous dark surface, yet they are
linked by a firm rhythmical arrangement and the subdued
diagonal pattern formed by their heads and hands.
Subtle modulations of the deep, glowing blacks
contribute to the harmonious fusión of the whole and
form an unforgettable contrast with the powerful whites
and vivid flesh tones where the detached strokes reach
a peak of breadth and strength. (our italics)
The compositional unity of a painting
contributes fundamentally to the power of its image. It is
reasonable to consider a painting's composition. But here the
composition is written about as though it were in itself the
emotional charge of the painting. Terms like harmonious fusión,
unforgettable contrast, reaching a peak of breadth and strength
transfer the emotion provoked by the image from the plañe
of lived experience, to that of disinterested 'art
appreciation'. All conflict disappears. One is left with the
unchanging 'human condition', and the painting considered as
a marvellously made object.

The last t w o great paintings by Frans Hals portray
the Governors and the Governesses of an Alms House for oíd
paupers in the Dutch seventeenth-century city of Haarlem.
They were officially commissioned portraits. Hals, an oíd man
12

Very little is known about Hals or the Regents
who commissioned him. I t is not possible to produce
circumstantial evidence to establish what their relations were.
But there is the evidence of the paintings themselves: the
evidence of a group of men and a group of women as seen by
another man, the painter. Study this evidence and judge for
yourself.
13

The art historian fears such direct judgement:
As ¡n so many other pictures by Hals, the penetrating
characterizations almost seduce us into believing that we
know the personality traits and even the habits of the
men and women portrayed.
What is this 'seduction' he writes of ? It is
nothing less than the paintings working upon'us. They work
upon us because w e accept the way Hals saw his sitters. We
do not accept this innocently. We accept it in so far as it
corresponds to our own observation of people, gestures, faces,
institutions. This is possible because we still live in a society
of comparable social relations and moral valúes. And it is
precisely this which gives the paintings their psychoiogicai and
social urgency. It is this - not the painter's skill as a "seducer"
- which convinces us that we can know the people portrayed.
The author continúes:
In the case of some critics the seduction has been a
total success. It has, for example, been asserted that
the Regent in the tipped slouch hat, which hardly covers
any of his long, lank hair, and whose curiously set
eyes do not focus, was shown in a drunken state.
14

This, he suggests, is a libel. He argües that it was
a fashion at that time to wear hats on the side of the head.
He cites medical opinión to prove that the Regent's expression
could well be the result of a facial paralysis. He insists that the
painting would have been unacceptable to the Regents if one
of them had been portrayed drunk. One might go on
discussing each of these points for pages. (Men in
seventeenth-century Holland wore their hats on the side of
their heads in order to be thought of as adventurous and
pleasure loving. Heavy drinking was an approved practice.
Etcétera.) But such a discussion would take us even farther
away from the only confrontation which matters and which the
author is determined to evade.
In this confrontation the Regents and
Regentesses stare at Hals, a destitute oíd painter who has lost
his reputation and lives off public charity; he examines them
through the eyes of a pauper who must nevertheless try to be
objective, i.e., must try to surmount the way he sees as a
pauper. This is the drama of these paintings. A drama of an
' unforgettable contrast'.
Mystification has little to do with the
vocabulary used. Mystification is the process of explaining
15

away what might otherwíse be evident. Hals was the first
portraitist to paint the new characters and expressions
created by capitalism. He did in pictorial terms what Balzac
did t w o centuries later in literature. Yet the author of the
authoritative work on these paintings sums up the artist's
achievement by referring to
Hals's unwavering commitment to his personal visión,
which enriches our consciousness of our fellow men
and heightens our awe for the ever-increasing power of
the mighty impulses that enabled him to give us a cióse
view of life's vital forces.

After the invention of the camera this
contradiction gradually became apparent.

That is mystification.
In order to avoid mystifying the past (which can
equally well suffer pseudo-Marxist mystification) let us now
examine the particular relation which now exists, so far as
pictorial images are concerned, between the present and the
past. If w e can see the present clearly enough, we shall ask
the right questions of the past.
Today we see the art of the past as nobody saw
it before. We actually perceive it in a different way.
This difference can be illustrated in terms of what
was thought of as perspective. The convention of
perspective, which is unique to European art and which was
first established in the early Renaissance, centres
everything on the eye of the beholder. It is like a beam f rom a
lighthouse - only instead of light travelling outwards,
appearances travel in. The conventions called those
appearances reality. Perspective makes the single eye the
centre of the visible world. Everything converges on to the
eye as to the vanishing point of infinity. The visible world is
arranged for the spectator as the universe was once thought
to be arranged for God.
According to the convention of perspective there
is no visual reciprocity. There is no need for God to sitúate
himself in relation to others: he is himself the situation.
The inherent contradiction in perspective was that it
structured all images of reality to address a single spectator
who, unlike God, could only be in one place at a time.
16

i o

~ 2
So

-

E

l'm an eye. A mechanical eye. I, the machine, show you
a world the way only I can see it. I free myself for
today and forever from human immobility. l'm in
constant movement. I approach and pulí away from
objects. I creep under them. I move alongside a running
horse's mouth. I fall and rise with the falling and rising
bodies. This is I, the machine, manoeuvring in the chaotic
movements, recording one movement after another in
the most complex combinations.
Freed from the boundaries of time and space, I
co-ordinate any and all points of the universe, wherever
I want them to be. My way leads towards the creation
of a fresh perception of the world. Thus I explain in a
new way the world unknown to you.*
17

The camera isolated
momentary appearances and in so doing destroyed the idea
that images were timeless. Or, to put it another way, the
camera showed that the notion of time passing was
inseparable from the experience of the visual (except in
paintings). What you saw depended upon where you were
when. What you saw was relative to your position in time and
space. It was no longer possible to imagine everything
converging on the human eye as on the vanishing point of
infinity.

The invention of the camera also changed the way
in which men saw paintings painted long before the camera
was invented. Originally paintings were an integral part of the
building for which they were designed. Sometimes in an early
Renaissance church or chapel one has the feeling that the
images on the wall are records of the building's interior life,
that together they make up the building's memory — so much
are they part of the particularity of the building.

This is not to say that before the invention of the
camera men believed that everyone could see everything. But
perspective organized the visual f ield as though that were
indeed the ideal. Every drawing or painting that used
perspective proposed to the spectator that he was the unique
centre of the world. The camera - and more particularly the
movie camera - demonstrated that there was no centre.
The invention of the camera changed the way men
saw. The visible carne to mean something different to them.
This was immediately reflectad in painting.
For the Impressionists the visible no longer
presented itself to man in order to be seen. On the contrary,
the visible, in continual flux, became fugitive. For the Cubists
the visible was no longer what confronted the single eye,
but the totality of possible views taken from points all round
the object (or person) being depicted.

The uniqueness of every painting was once part
of the uniqueness of the place where it resided. Sometimes the
painting was transportable. But it could never be seen in t w o
places at the same time. When the camera reproduces a
painting, it destroys the uniqueness of its image. As a result its
meaning changes. Or, more exactly, its meaning muitiplies and
fragments into many meanings.
This is vividly illustrated by what happens when a
painting is shown on a televisión screen. The painting enters
each viewer's house. There it is surrounded by his wallpaper,
his furniture, his mementoes. It enters the atmosphere of his
19

family. It becomes their talking point. It lends its meaning to
their meaning. At the same time it enters a million other
houses and, in each of them, is seen in a different context.
Because of the camera, the painting now travels to the
spectator rather than the spectator to the painting. In its
travels, its meaning is diversified.

One might argüe that all reproductions more or
less distort, and that therefore the original painting is still in
a sense unique. Here is a reproduction of the Virgin of the Rocks
by Leonardo da Vinci.

Having seen this reproduction, one can go to the
National Gallery to look at the original and there discover what
the reproduction lacks. Alternatively one can forget about the
quality of the reproduction and simply be reminded, when one
sees the original, that it is a famous painting of which
somewhere one has already seen a reproduction. But in either
case the uniqueness of the original now lies in it being the
original of a reproduction. It is no longer what its image shows
that strikes one as unique; its first meaning is no longer to be
found in what it says, but in what it is.
This new status of the original work is the
perfectly rational consequence of the new means of
reproduction. But it is at this point that a process of
mystification again enters. The meaning of the original work
no longer lies in what it uniquely says but in what it uniquely
is. How is its unique existence evaluated and defined in our
present culture? It is defined as an object whose valué
depends upon its rarity. This valué is affirmed and gauged by
the price it fetches on the market. But because it is
nevertheless 'a work of a r t ' - and art is thought to be greater
than commerce — its market price is said to be a reflection of
its spiritual valué. Yet the spiritual valué of an object, as
distinct from a message or an example, can only be explained
in terms of magic or religión. And since in modern society
neither of these is a living forcé, the art object, the 'work of
art', is enveloped in an atmosphere of entirely bogus religiosity.
Works of art are discussed and presented as though they were
holy relies: relies which are first and foremost evidence of
their own survival. The past in which they originated is
studied in order to prove their survival genuine. They
are declared art when their line of descent can be
certified.
Before the Virgin of the Rocks the visitor to the
National Gallery would be encouraged by nearly everything
he might have heard and read about the painting to feel
something like this: ' I am in front of it. I can see it. This
painting by Leonardo is unlike any other in the world. The
National Gallery has the real one. If I look at this painting hard
enough, I should somehow be able to feel its authenticity.
The Virgin of the Rocks by Leonardo da Vinci: it is authentic and
therefore it is beautiful.'

20

21

To dismiss such feelings as na'íve would be quite
wrong. They accord perfectly with the sophisticated culture of
art experts for whom the National Gallery catalogue is
written. The entry on the Virgin of the Rocks is one of the
longest enfries. It consists of fourteen closely printed pages.
They do not deal with the meaning of the image. They deal
with who commissioned the painting, legal squabbles, who
owned it, its likely date, the families of its owners. Behind this
information lie years of research. The aim of the research is to
prove beyond any shadow of doubt that the painting is a
genuine Leonardo. The secondary aim is to prove that an
almost identical painting in the Louvre is a replica of the
National Gallery versión.

The National Gallery sells more reproductions of
Leonardo's cartoon of The Virgin and Child with St Anne and St
John the Baptist than any other picture in their collection. A few
years ago it was known only to scholars. It became famous
because an American wanted to buy it for t w o and a half
million pounds.
Now it hangs in a room by itself. The room is like
a chapel. The drawing is behind bullet-proof perspex. It has
acquired a new kind of impressiveness. Not because of what it
shows — not because of the meaning of its image. It has
become impressive, mysterious, because of its market valué.

French art historians try to prove the opposite.
22

The bogus religiosity which now surrounds
original works of art, and which is ultimately dependent upon
their market valué, has become the substitute for what
paintings lost when the camera made them reproducible. Its
function is nostalgic. It is the final empty claim for the
continuing valúes of an oligarchic, undemocratic culture. If the
image is no longer unique and exclusive, the art object, the
thing, must be made mysteriously so.
23

The majority of the population do not visit art
museums. The following table shows how closely an
interest in art is related to privileged education.
National proportion of art museum visitors according to level of education:
Percentage of each educational category who visit art museums
Greece
With no
educational
qualification
Only
primary
education

0.02

0.30

Poland

0.12

1.50

Greece

Poland

France

Holland

0.15

Only
secondary
education

10.5

10.4

10

20

0.45

Further and
higher
education

11.5

11.7

12.5

17.3

France

Holland

0.50

reproduce certain aspeets of an image faithfully; it is a
question of reproduction making it possible, even inevitable,
that an image will be used for many different purposes and
that the reproduced image, unlike an original work, can lend
itself to them all. Let us examine some of the ways in which
the reproduced image lends itself to such usage.

Source: Pierre Bourdieu and Alain Darbel L 'Amour de /'Art, Editions de Minuit, Paris 1969, Appendix 5, table 4

The majority take ít as axiomatic that the
museums are full of holy relies which refer to a mystery
which exeludes them: the mystery of unaccountable wealth.
Or, to put this another way, they believe that original
masterpieces belong to the preserve (both materially and
spiritually) of the rich. Another table indicates what the idea
of an art gallery suggests to each social class.
Of the places Usted below which does a museum remind you
of most?
Manual
workers

Church
Library
Lecture hall
Department store or
entrance hall in publlc
building
Church and library
Church and lecture hall
Library and lecture hall
None of these
No reply

66
9

—
—
9
4

-4
8

100(n = 53)

Skilled and
white collar
workers

Professional
and upper
managerial

45
34
4

30.5

7
2
2

2
4.5

_
2
4

100(n = 98)

Reproduction isolates a detail of a painting from
the whole. The detail is transformed. An allegorical figure
becomes a portrait of a girl.

28
4.5

-2

19.5
9

100(n = 99)

Source: as above, appendix 4, table 8

In the age of pictorial reproduction the meaning
of paintings is no longer attached to them ; their meaning
becomes transmittable: that is to say it becomes information
of a sort, and, like all information, it is either put to use or
ignored; information carries no special authority within itself.
When a painting is put to use, its meaning is either modified or
totally changed. One should be quite clear about what this
involves. It is not a question of reproduction failing to
24

25

When a painting is reproduced by a film camera
it inevitably becomes material for the film-maker's argument.
A film which reproduces images of a painting leads
the spectator, through the painting, to the film-maker's own
conclusions. The painting lends authority to the film-maker.

M

. • ^Hk^\

This is because a film unfolds in time and a painting does not.

' '

' V'"'V*

f

í¿X3poí
PPT¡

11

\ f

In a film the way one image follows another, their succession,
constructs an argument which becomes irreversible.

Paintings are often reproduced with words around them.

This is a landscape of a cornfield with birds flying
out of it. Look at it for a moment. Then turn the page.

":'1*5Bí*K';;:' '• '-••' •-.

••' Wf ~ •••In a painting all its elements are there to be seen
simultaneousiy. The spectator may need time to examine each
eiement of the painting but whenever he reaches a conclusión,
the simultaneity of the whole painting is there to reverse or
qualify his conclusión. The painting maintains its own
authority.
26

27

51

Consequently a reproduction, as well as making
its own references to the image of its original, becomes
itself the reference point for other images. The meaning of
an image is changed according to what one sees immediately
beside it or what comes immediately after it. Such authority
as it retains, is distributed over the whole context in which
it appears.

':

O m

**#

•ti7

3&Y

^3|»-»""

*V*
-"Sr*

jf«i

S /S -/he latJ-pi'dUA/z ifv&h Veno (¿ojh a&ntzaL
hefbrt he. l&'IUc/ hJnseJfIt is hard to define exactly how the words have
changed the image but undoubtedly they have. The image now
illustrates the sentence.
In this essay each image reproduced has become
part of an argument which has little or nothing to do with the
painting's original independent meaning. The words have
quoted the paintings to confirm their own verbal authority.
(The essays without words in this book may make that
distinction clearer.)
Reproduced paintings, like all information, have to
hold their own against all the other information being
continually transmitted.

;drop
SSSF'1

Goiiig.t £1,680,000

£j^^«W*£?

£¿V=-=H|

'lt will fil perfectly

ILrT-E!~! "M ~

--*

¡j I Y ' — -

; Subject and significance in
Titian's Death of Actaeon

28

Hwomen knew then... what «rey know now

Because works of art are reproducible, they can,
theoretically, be used by anybody. Yet mostly - in art books,
magazines, films or within gilt frames in living-rooms reproductions are still used to bolster the ¡Ilusión that
nothing has changed, that art, with its unique undiminished
authority, justifies most other forms of authority, that art
makes inequality seem noble and hierarchies seem thrilling.
For example, the whole concept of the National Cultural
Heritage exploits the authority of art to glorify the present
social system and its priorities.
29

The means of reproduction are used politically
and commercially to disguise or deny what their existence
makes possible. But sometimes individuáis use them
differently.

Adults and children sometimes have boards in
their bedrooms or living-rooms on which they pin pieces of
paper: letters, snapshots, reproductions of paintings,
newspaper cuttings, original drawings, postcards. On each
board all the images belong to the same language and all are
more or less equal within it, because they have been chosen in
a highly personal way to match and express the experience of
the room's inhabitant. Logically, these boards should replace
museums.
What are we saying by that? Let us first be sure
about what we are not saying.
We are not saying that there is nothing left to
experience before original works of art except a sense of awe
because they have survived. The way original works of art are
usually approached - through museum catalogues, guides,
hired cassettes, etc. - is not the only way they might be
approached. When the art of the past ceases to be viewed
nostalgically, the works will cease to be holy relies - although
they will never re-become what they were before the age of
reproduction. We are not saying original works of art are now
useless.
30

Original paintings are silent and still in a sense
that information never is. Even a reproduction hung on a wall
is not comparable in this respect for in the original the silence
and stillness permeate the actual material, the paint, in which
one follows the traces of the painter's immediate gestures.
This has the effect of closing the distance in time between the
painting of the picture and one's own act of looking at it. In
this special sense all paintings are contemporary. Henee the
immediacy of their testimony. Their historical moment is
literally there before our eyes. Cézanne made a similar
observation from the painter's point of view. 'A minute in the
world's life passes! To paint it in its reality, and forget
everything for t h a t ! To become that minute, to be the
sensitive píate . . . give the image of what w e see, forgetting
everything that has appeared before our time . . .' What we
make of that painted moment when it is before our eyes
depends upon what we expect of art, and that in turn depends
today upon how w e have already experienced the meaning of
paintings through reproductions.
31

Ñor are we saying that all art can be understood
spontaneously. We are not claiming that to cut out a magazine
reproduction of an archaic Greek head, because it is reminiscent
of some personal experience, and to pin it on to a board
beside other disparate images, is to come to terms with the
full meaning of that head.
The idea of innocence faces t w o ways. By refusing
to enter a conspiracy, one remains innocent of that conspiracy.
But to remain innocent may also be to remain ignorant. The
issue is not between innocence and knowledge (or between the
natural and the cultural) but between a total approach to art
which attempts to relate it to every aspect of experience and
the esoteric approach of a f e w specialized experts who are the
clerks of the nostalgia of a ruling class in decline. (In decline,
not before the proletariat, but before the new power of the
corporation and the state.) The real question is: to whom does
the meaning of the art of the past properly belong? To those
who can apply it to their own lives, or to a cultural hierarchy
of relie specialists?
The visual arts have always existed within a
certain preserve; originally this preserve was magical or
sacred. But it was also physical: it was the place, the cave, the
building, in which, or for which, the work was made. The
experience of art, which at f irst was the experience of ritual,
was set apart from the rest of life — precisely in order to be
able to exercise power over it. Later the preserve of art became
a social one. It entered the culture of the ruling class, whilst
physically it was set apart and isolated in their palaces and
houses. During all this history the authority of art was
inseparable from the particular authority of the preserve.
What the modern means of reproduction have
done is to destroy the authority of art and to remove it - or,
rather, to remove its images which they reproduce - from any
preserve. For the f irst time ever, images of art have become
ephemeral, ubiquitous, insubstantial, available, valueless, f ree.
They surround us in the same way as a language surrounds us.
They have entered the mainstream of life over which they no
longer, in themselves, have power.
Yet very f e w people are aware of what has
happened because the means of reproduction are used nearly
32

all the time to promote the ¡Ilusión that nothing has changed
except that the masses, thanks to reproductions, can now
begin to appreciate art as the cultured minority once did.
Understandably, the masses remain uninterested and sceptical.
If the new language of images were used
differently, it would, through its use, confer a new kind of
power. Within it w e could begin to define our experiences more
precisely in áreas where words are inadequate. (Seeing comes
before words.) Not only personal experience, but also the
essential historical experience of our relation to the past: that
is to say the experience of seeking to give meaning to our lives,
of trying to understand the history of which w e can become
the active agents.
The art of the past no longer exists as it once did.
Its authority is lost. In its place there is a language of images.
What matters now is who uses that language for what
purpose. This touches upon questions of copyright for
reproduction, the ownership of art presses and publishers, the
total policy of publie art galleries and museums. As usually
presented, these are narrow professional matters. One of the
aims of this essay has been to show that what is really at
stake is much larger. A people or a class which is cut off from
its own past is far less free to choose and to act as a people or
class than one that has been able to sitúate itself in history.
This is why — and this is the only reason why — the entire art
of the past has now become a political issue.

33

Many of the ideas in the preceding essay have been taken from
another, written over forty years ago by the Germán critic and
philosopher Walter Benjamín.

His essay was entitled The Work of Art in the Age of
Mechanical Reproduction. This essay is available in English in a
collection called llluminations (Cape, London 1970).

34

