Haiver | 00:00
Hi, everyone. Welcome back. This is our final session with Jen and Kevin McCoy. As you might have realized about the structure of our visiting artist times, we spend the first week talking about their work as they give a presentation, We spend the second week digging into craft and what it means to make work and think about process and materiality. And this third session with them, spread out over the first five weeks of this quarter, focuses on what it means to build a long-term career in the arts as an artist. This gets into professional practice, if you will.
So I'm really excited to welcome them back and dig into this together. So welcome, guys. Hey. Good to see So the students have sent in lots of great questions that I've weaved in to some of my own as well.
Kevin McCoy | 00:49
Everybody. Thanks for showing up again.
Haiver | 00:58
I think a good place to start is When did you start thinking about your practice as kind of a long-term career instead of just a series of projects or interests?
Jenn McCoy | 01:12
I don't know. I mean, for me, I was in it from like, end of senior year of college. Maybe even a little before I just sort of, I mean, I was thinking more film industry at that point, maybe, but I had, you know, kind of a, kind of an experimental film practice cooking, you know, kind of as I went into senior year of college. I don't know. I just figured it would work didn't really have a plan exactly, but I was just a terrible employee.
Kevin McCoy | 01:40
Out. I.
Jenn McCoy | 01:50
I just really did not see myself like it was a little bit like that John Cusack movie. I just like I didn't want to like sell anything, buy anything, prosper.
Like, I really, you know, I guess I knew faculty at my job who would, I mean, at my school who seemed to have nice lives and I just figured, well, you know, maybe teaching's possible. Let's figure out an MFA.
So I, you know, in short shrift kind of like, you know, learned about and went into the MFA. Yeah. And I had no, you know, real practical training.
I mean, the most practical thing that I did was a little design work kind of in between, you know, you after graduate school a little bit, you know, but Yeah, it wasn't a solid plan, but that was the plan.
Kevin McCoy | 02:42
And, you know, for me, it's similar, but, you know, different, or I guess just reflects my specific situation. I was committed to, I studied and was in love with philosophy in undergrad and so I was fairly committed to, let's call it the life of the mind and seeing, you know, the practical side of reality as sort of a problem to minimize and, you know, kind of solve in, you know, in an ad hoc way. And so that aligns, they're very different practices, you know, philosophy versus art making, but they share that, you the approach I just described segues well into art making. But for me, the bigger switch was just that kind of switch into that identity as like, I'm an artist and I'm going to make artwork.
Jenn McCoy | 03:30
I should just-- go ahead.
Kevin McCoy | 03:40
And that took a long time. That took a bunch of time, a number of years. It was well into my 20s. Before I was really comfortable with that and kind of embracing that.
Jenn McCoy | 03:52
I just want to add that, you know, there was no reason this needed to that this was a good plan. Like we are both from weirdly similar working class backgrounds.
You know, our parents all have college degrees, but, you know, they're in education, you know, my parents are both like public school teachers, Kevin's or, you know, kind of speech pathology and, you know, a little bit of sales and you know, there, it wasn't like, you know, we didn't have to worry about income and a professional life. It was, you know, I just feel like we're solidly Gen X. We were raised to be extremely suspicious. And even though people our age have started things like, you know, the internet, that was, this was before all of that. And, you know, we really, Yeah, did not have a total realistic view of what was before us. But I think, you know, sort of survived on energy. And, you know, I just remember looking at a tax return, like somewhere probably between undergraduate and grad school. And I think I made like $6,000 that year. And I was totally fine.
You know, if you have okay health, and, you know, you're willing to eat badly and live in a weird apartment. We kind of did that for a really long time.
Haiver | 05:11
Yeah. I mean, that kind of brings me to my next question, which is, I mean, what did you have to do? Making art takes time, right? You have to get time in the studio, you have to have time for things to percolate. What did you have to do to free up time to be able to make art at that stage?
Kevin McCoy | 05:28
Yeah, I mean, the number one thing is to control your living expenses as much as you can be in control of those as much as you can. And so there's a bunch of strategies for how one might do that. First and foremost is kind of choosing where to live and kind of how to live. But the extent to which you can constrain and contain and be in control of those required costs that you have to do, that just absolutely gives you additional flexibility and that kind of trade-off of time versus money. And so we, in terms of employment and jobs, you know, we, and I think in my case, it's because of this philosophy background. I always assumed that I would go into teaching.
You know, it's like, I'm going to be teaching because that's what philosophers do or something, you know, something like that. And so even in that kind of perspective persisted across generations. The transition into art making. And so that's what we did.
You know, that's how it worked out for us, you know. And so there were some requirements in that way, right?
So to be a David Apsley: university level teacher by and large in the United States, especially at the time we were coming up that means you need to have a terminal degree. David Apsley: And in our field a terminal degree, meaning the highest degree terminal degree is a master's of fine arts period and MFA. David Apsley: And you know that's kind of changing or evolving or whatever, but so we you know. I wanted, I mean, it was Jen's idea to like go to art school, let's go to an MFA. And I'm like, what? But you know, it was a good idea. And that was my one and only art school experience, you know, so I'm really kind of thankful for it. But so teaching was, you know, kind of what's that for us? And I should say that is not some sort of magic panacea.
You know, it's not, you know, it's, poorly paid and it's demanding has its own demands and whatever you know and so just that juggle of like how do you find time for everything is a ongoing challenge and that's really the you know that's a key part of our decision to collaborate too it's just a you know a way to unify all of those processes as much as possible and not be in kind of a zero sum competition with each other regarding those things.
Jenn McCoy | 07:57
Yeah. And if one person is at the day job, the other person can keep the studio practice kind of afloat for the day.
So, yeah. You know, that's been nice to like think about, you know, co-producing projects and, you know, I think the answer to some of this is you will try to have the art being made whether or not you're specifically in the studio at that moment. How to stretch the project out. And so, you know, sometimes that could mean hiring an assistant because your job is better paid than, you know, than it would make sense for you to quit so that, you know what I mean? To really kind of think about like art production as an ongoing process and how to fund that. And, you know, I, I'm all over the, well, friends are all over the place with the day jobs.
You know, some people really like. Having a day job that has zero to do with art making. And funding their life in a very compartmentalized way. I always felt that was a little strange and hard and I like to do things that feed my practice, And that can mean, you know, working As a web designer or interactivity designer, I've done before a little bit. And teaching, obviously, I feel is very copious. With that, although I think it ruins your mind a little bit sometimes to have to explain ideas that thoroughly. And I, you know, definitely. And some, I'm very, you know, in awe of artists who don't have to teach because I feel that their ideas are private and a little bit less accessible and the work is less accessible. And I think it kind of changes that one-to-one relationship. But that's a really personal decision and it just depends what other kinds of skill sets you have and because we work with art and technology, you know, a lot of people in our group are fairly gifted programmers and have skills that lend themselves well to relatively high paying day jobs, and then the art is to just keep that as a part-time endeavor and not get swallowed by, you know, deadlines and build ship dates and, you know, all of those things. And that, that's really, you know, that's really quite challenging.
Haiver | 10:21
One thing I've, in the artists I've spoken with over the years, I hear oftentimes thinking about how a day job can sometimes draw from the same well of energy or thinking if you do have it aligned. And I'm curious how you... Because you do like having those things be in unison in some way and connected to one another and not separate day job worlds.
Like how do you keep from drawing too much from the same well so that you still have energy and creativity for the work?
Kevin McCoy | 10:53
You know, art making, art, practice is really different than you know, even the most kind of creative technology thing, you know, they're different endpoints, different goals. And so it's definitely true that like, if you're, Because the artist's number one job is to have an idea, it's like, you got to have an idea. Think of an idea. What's your idea? Let's see the idea. And if your job is like-- requiring endless ideas, I could see that being kind of hard, you know, if you were, I don't know.
You know, you have to kind of like both really go for it and just let yourself off the hook to a certain extent. It's like... And it comes down to like a self-regard, you know, it's like, And I guess I kind of bring this back to like that first question of like, when did you decide that this was your, you know, what you were and what you did, you know, and I can just remember, you know, first say it's kind of like coming out of the closet or something, you know, it's like, I'm an artist. This is what I do. I'm an artist.
And then, you know, when you, And the biggest challenge is believing that yourself. Yeah. And not, you know, quelling the voice of just like, well, you're a fucking loser. What an asshole. Listen to this guy, you know, kind of thing. And, you know, so this is, you know, purely my own kind of problem. Right. But, you know, so once you do that, then it's just like, okay, that's what you're doing.
So, you can do it a lot. You can be practicing a lot. You could kind of be in this kind of down cycle. You can kind of like give yourself a break, you know, because of things happening in your life.
You know, so it's just like, imagine if you were like in the hospital for six months, you know, you wouldn't be thinking that, I'm not, you know what I mean? It was just like, you would still have that identity. That identity wouldn't be taken away from you know, because of some kind of practical matter like that, you know?
So I just think you can kind of do it. You can just sort of do it. And when things are tough or dry or whatever, give yourself a little bit of a break and not feel like you've just condemned yourself to you know, You've pulled the rug out from under yourself in some complete way or something. I don't know if that makes sense.
Haiver | 13:12
Yeah, completely. Because you work together in this amazing collaborative process that, again, makes it not a zero-sum game, and I really love that phrase, it does remove any barrier that is between work-life balance in some way, or it has the risk to do so. Is that something you ever worried about?
Kevin McCoy | 13:35
Well, that was by design.
Jenn McCoy | 13:38
Yeah, what do other couples talk about? I wouldn't, I don't know. It seems like, you know, you're together for a.
Kevin McCoy | 13:45
While. That was by design. That was just like, how do we break down the barrier between art and life? It's like, I know let's do this way, you know? -.
Jenn McCoy | 13:54
Yeah, we do have children and I wish we had convinced both of them to like join the practice a little bit. We were luckier with one than the other. But yeah, I remember our oldest daughter saying, I hate art and I hate naked people. And she refused to go to museums after that. Now she's coming back around. But there's this couple in England that, what were their names, Kevin, the couple that the kids joined the art practice with?
Kevin McCoy | 14:24
.. Yeah, the B. B or D something family, what the fuck? They make those cross sections of.
Jenn McCoy | 14:39
Dirt. Yeah, of earth.
Yeah, really cool. I always thought that would be a great goal, but they were fairly useless in the studio. We tried.
Yeah, you know, I do. I think that it can be tricky in that, you know, especially if you're under a deadline or there's some sort of, you know, stress that it could really sort of, you know, you don't have anywhere to kind of run and hide. But we do have separate teaching jobs and, you know, staff. Friends and all the normal things.
You know, there's not like zero, it's not like, you know, a 24-7 conversation. The Boyle family, thank you so it.
Kevin McCoy | 15:20
Much. Boyle, that's Well, then, like...
Jenn McCoy | 15:23
Either a really astute art historian or some deft Googling. Either way, thank you.
Haiver | 15:31
Are there?
Kevin McCoy | 15:32
Andy Collard. I know Andy from Instagram. I didn't know you were here. Hey, Andy. Awesome. Awesome. Love watching your stuff on IG.
Haiver | 15:40
Yeah. We've got some great artists in the program. It's really special. Kind of why I wanted you guys to zoom in this way this time. I'm curious, have you found other strategies you found for protecting the relationship when things get stressful?
Like besides just I can go teach and I don't have to be here all the time?
Kevin McCoy | 16:00
Thank you. Keep it for dinner...
I mean, you know, as part of the let's integrate art and life as much as possible thing, you know, means that all of that is sort of inseparable from just sort of general relationship management, whatever, which is just like, don't, you know, don't take yourself so seriously and, give some ground and space to the other person.
Jenn McCoy | 16:33
- My only worry sometimes is that, the more difficult to express or, maybe wacky ideas don't, end up at the level of production because they kind of have to be at least have some you know, kind of head of steam behind them from both parties and the collaboration to sort of make it onto the calendar. I mean, lately, it's not so much like that. There's little research projects that, you know, one or both of us are off doing.
And then you kind of like, hey, this could be a thing that we both want to do. But specifically, I don't know, in our world from like, 2001 to 2008, it was like, production. There was not a lot of room to pause and reflect and run new ideas up the flagpole.
So I can't really blame it on Kevin or each other. I think it was more a vicissitude of the fact that you know, It just got a little out of control in that we had sort of three galleries and each of them had shows and then everything. It was that moment where everyone was doing as many art fairs as humanly possible. And it became just a little bit difficult to kind of keep up with everything. And so it felt, you know, it felt really hard to just stop for a minute and have that kind of, you know, is this a good idea reflection time on every single thing that left the studio and that was really painful. And yet you in the back of your mind know that As soon as that level stops, then it's not busy enough. And that I think is the constant, you know, juggle of being like overwhelmed and then not busy enough. And, you know, I think different artists.
You know, deal with that different ways. Some people have long term studio managers that can kind of help with that.
You know, other people, you know, have, I don't know. For one of a better word, a kind of shtick that is their bread and butter that someone keeps making while they do other things. And that has never been neither of those things have ever been appealing to us. And so, yeah, there's a lot of, you know, different strategies for working that out, but it's hard, you know, and yeah.
Yeah, it's a hard balance.
Haiver | 19:01
Yeah. I found in my own relationship, even though we don't collaborate often, All right, there's a moment when an idea gets floated, and you have to be try to be as generous as you can in that moment. And even though you haven't wrapped your head fully around it yet, to recognize that, this is a me problem, not an you or an idea, a problem with the idea. And it takes a level of, you know, it's taken a long time for me to learn that. And we're not even collaborating that closely. It's sort of one bar conversation over a martini, like, here's an idea for a new book. What do you think? And to make sure you're protecting the idea in that moment and making space for it can be so hard. Absolutely.
So I'm curious about the transition into the gallery world. Like you just mentioned having three, but let's rewind for a second and just start at one.
Like how did that first come about? And maybe part of that question is, what did it mean to build community around your art that would lead to that moment?
Jenn McCoy | 20:09
Yeah, I mean, we really just arrived in New York with kind of one project under our belt that we were like, we should show this to people. And, you know, I remember like somebody said, yeah. Just send out a bunch of faxes. We made this like... We made this fax for this open studio event. We did?
Yeah, don't you Back seeing like people I'd never met and just kind of heard about and museums and all this.
Kevin McCoy | 20:35
Remember that? God, vaguely. Yeah. Holy shit.
Jenn McCoy | 20:46
But anyway, we did have a knot of friends who showed up to that studio visit. And one of them was this little artist run gallery, the floor above our studio. And I think that maybe led directly to showing everybody.
Like literally the floor above us in this little gallery with, that was run by this artist, Caroline Spilios, that was called Flipside Gallery. And then someone reviewed that piece and said, Slowly that kind of thing started happening. We had, An artist we were friends with, Steven Vitello, was a resident at the World Trade Center with us. And, you know, I forget how we heard about that, but it was like that, you know, LMCC open views. And we had a studio in, you know, the 91st floor of the World Trade Center, probably 20, not the last artist residents before 9/11, but the second to the last.
So pretty Frickin close and. And that was something that curators, gallerists, and people were coming to see as open studios. And I think that's maybe I think maybe that was the second time Postmasters had a conversation with us about maybe doing something. And yeah, and then, you know, just saying yes to all kinds of weird opportunities, you know, like, Artists run galleries, you know, a project in a lobby at SVA. I remember we showed something and, you know, I think the rule is still the same in New York as always.
Like if someone hears your name from three different people, three different times, they start to go, this is work I should pay attention to. And so you kind of, you know, we try, I mean, we literally try to be like, okay, how many nights a week can we possibly go out and still get studio work done? You know and i had read just kids you know the book the robert mapplethorpe and i was like god how did he like go out all the time and make work and i was like okay this is the thing the work has to be really solid you can't just go out like you have to do both so we tried to like find events in you know the then very nascent digital community that You know where we could meet fellow travelers. We met Ricardo Dominguez really early like maybe the first event we ever went to in New York, and he was someone who knew a lot of people and was always at events and connected us to really interesting people and we collaborated with him, you know, and it was a very collaborating kind of moment I'm talking about net art in the late 90s. And early 2000s. And so, you know, Yael Kanarik, like these people were like setting up, you know, kind of, listservs almost and, you know, meeting groups.
So we were in a small group of artists that would meet and talk about what is art and technology. And so that was us and Corey Archangel and Mark Napier and Yael Kanarik. And, Mike Sarf and Tim Whitten, who were MTAA at the time. Who else was in that group?
Kevin McCoy | 24:05
Wolfgang Stahler.
Jenn McCoy | 24:06
Wolfgang Kramer-Murthy. Yeah, so that was like this loose, like, you know, we'd all be at freezing openings together and you'd see the same people all the time. And it's so fun.
Like, I love that. I feel like the digital community still has that. And I really try to, you know, go and support, you know, in-person events whenever possible. It's just so cool that new people keep turning up.
Kevin McCoy | 24:33
Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 24:33
I don't know if the painters have that. Like, I really don't.
Like, I know, I think they do sort of, but it's a small enough group that you can start naming names. And so I think that's helpful is to sort of have like a group within a group or a small enough niche where, you know, you don't have to stand uncomfortably at the edge and then just leave.
Like, you'll know a few people. I mean, that's how we met you, Haver.
Yeah.
Haiver | 24:54
It's true. Yeah, a lot of gallery going. I just sort of materialized at one point in the New York gallery, new media art scene. And it turned out, like you said, it's a much smaller group. And therefore, getting to know a lot of the names, most of the names, sometimes it feels like happened very quickly, which I really appreciate. And because everyone's doing weird things and feels like an outsider.
I mean, I imagine with the painters, like, it feels just like a lot of competition, like, you're doing abstract painting, and I'm doing abstract painting. And the difference between our things is like much smaller in terms of typology than there is between, I'm doing installation art with video and cameras, and you're doing things with robotics and, or net art, like, I think that weirdness opens up a space for connection as well as there's just more exchange of knowledge like, how did you do that cool thing? Because I don't know how to do that. People love to share process in our space.
Jenn McCoy | 25:55
-
Kevin McCoy | 25:56
And obviously that all is, you know, in a whole different era now than, you know, what we were talking about from way back in the day, you know, with social media and online communities like this. And of course, you know, kind of AI, not based knowledge transfer and whatever, you know, so it's. The facts of it, you know, the methodologies kind of changed to a certain extent, but the underlying rule of, you know, getting out there, meeting people, but having to have some kind of work to show and taking that work seriously, you know, that approach I'm sure is still the case.
Haiver | 26:33
- So while talking about the World Trade Center space and people coming through, I mean, before you had your first like solid gallery that was just in your corner and helping make connections like that. How are you nurturing relationships with collectors and curators, especially without it feeling transactional? I feel like that's always a worry. We.
Kevin McCoy | 26:58
Didn't have any.
Jenn McCoy | 26:59
Collectors. I don't think we knew any collectors or curators until we got a gallery. We had one collector. We had one. We had Julie. Julie Tallon, who I will shout brother is Reverend Billy.
Kevin McCoy | 27:08
Out. Her.
Jenn McCoy | 27:12
Have you ever heard of Reverend Billy, the Church of Stop Shopping? His sister is a screenwriter and had worked on Robert Altman projects. I don't remember when we were using and Paul Verhoeven. I don't remember who introduced us to Julie, but she was like, I love this. It's weird. And she bought a piece from us and I was like, that is incredible. She had a loft over on like Bond Street or something and I was like, this is amazing. This is exactly the kind of person that we need to know. And we had so much fun.
You know, we were just talking about ideas about film and glimpse culture and she was really into multi-screen video and... - That's right. - Yeah, and I think that was maybe the like one person we knew And so for us, it was really, I mean, it was like super traditional in a way, like we met a gallery, they had some people who were interested. And, you know, it wasn't like, hey, guys, here's your solo show. It was like, you know, first we did like one piece in the front of somebody else's exhibition. And we got really lucky with that one.
And then there was another, then we did like a larger installation, like that got a lot of press. And yeah, I, you know, we knew, I think we did know like people who wrote about art a little bit, just, you know, from hanging around. But you know, and I got really interested in Rhizome really early. Mark Tribe asked me to be on the board of Rhizome, like their first board, or maybe it was their second year of board before they joined the new museum.
So I met a few people that way. And then a lot of people we knew were in new media, like, you know, like Razorfish and like, you know, Pseudo and like these like, you know, now.
Kevin McCoy | 29:08
- Virgin seats.
Jenn McCoy | 29:09
- Virgin seats, Silicon Alley kind of scene. So there was some crossover there and the guy who founded Razorfish bought several pieces from us really early on.
So there was a lot of interesting, you know, interesting flow that way. And it's so funny because we you know, showed in the Bay Area really briefly thinking, it's that same thing.
Like a lot of people who are into technology will be interested in this art version. And like, it just was like, No, they're not. They maybe are now, but they know they were not.
So, you know, a lot of assumptions that are true in one city just are completely ridiculous in another, which was a good learning experience. And.
Haiver | 29:55
Yeah, I do. I mean, I still hear the nervous laughter from people who are trying to do things in San Francisco and approach the tech world in terms of selling art.
I mean, I was in a collector's DMs recently and the answer was like, I want to give to nonprofits that are basically going to change the world. Like, is this going to change the world? And they're thinking so like gigabrain about what they're doing. Doing and what their goals are.
Yeah, it still seems very hard out there to run a gallery and to present this kind of work. So I'm curious how, all right, so do you want to tell the story of Postmasters and how that fits into your trajectory and then maybe Expand that into the three gallery situation.
Like what does it mean to have multiple galleries and why would you want that in the first place? I think that would be new for a lot of artists.
Kevin McCoy | 30:55
Yeah, so I mean the Postmasters, it was a slow and kind of organic process. Process, you know, very local, very based here in New York. And so, you know, as we kind of outlined doing these different things, you know, so And I should say that in each case, you know, we had work. We had pieces that we had done and were ready to go and had some heft to them, even with the limited resources and whatever that we had. We had pushed it and gone for it in terms of thinking about our work and trying to make pieces. And so that meant that when, you know, these kind of weird little opportunities came, we could step into them and, you know, try to really think about how to do as good a job as we could.
So, you know, for example, you know, Jen told the story of the, you know, artist run space on the floor, you know, that we had this little art, we had an art studio, we rented a studio space. So we're in this building with other artists and then the floor above us, an artist is running this space.
You know, gallery kind of gallery thing inside her studio, you know, and then, you know, we do this piece there and this group show and the, you know, the, Julie Callen, you know, bought that piece kind of coming out of that show. And so, and then that piece, So everything kind of like chained together in a certain extent. The, you know, we had this other piece, you know, we're in this other group show in New York at School of Visual Arts and the, you know, one of the, you know, the gallery directors that, well, one of the two people running Postmaster saw it. And, you know, so it's like, you're out there, you're kind of, you know, putting your stuff out there and, you know, kind of rolling the dice, seeing what people, you know, seeing what happens with it.
And then, you know, and then kind of like fishing, you know, kind of like seeing what happens. And so with Postmasters, you know, they... Eventually said, we're, you know, do you want to do this little, we have this project space. Do you want to do something in the project.
Jenn McCoy | 33:09
Space? - Well, and we should preface it by there was not, I mean, there's not much happening now either, honestly, but it was the same. There was postmasters and we were told, these people are interested in art and technology. And to be clear, their entire program was not art and technology, a fact that I loved beyond belief.
You know, they had like I mean, they had one of my favorite artists still in the entire world, Perry Hoberman. And I was like, that is enough for me. I think that man is hilarious and amazing and I would do anything that Perry said in terms of art and career development. But they had like painters like Steve Mumford and LC Armstrong and you know later like amazing likely successful people like Austin Lee and Adam Sienowich and so the conversation was so interesting. And the art and technology was part of it. And yeah, they showed Wolfgang and yeah, she was just really open to things like that.
I mean, the other gallery at the time would have been Sandra Gehring, who showed Leo Villarreal really early on. And I think we did have a couple studio visits with her and it just wasn't as like. It wasn't as like spirited. It was more like what products can you make? And I was just like, I don't know what that is.
You know, so I couldn't quite figure out that. And then I think maybe a couple other Chelsea galleries we had studio visits with, and, you know, it just... Either doesn't go anywhere or it's just like there's not that spark of recognition of like, you know, like minds. But it's the same now.
Like there's just not, you know, there are people who you start hearing about would be open to doing something that's not literally, you know, painting in a square. And you know, you start going to their space and thinking about what conversations are happening in the gallery. And I don't think you have to like 100% of what someone is showing or doing, but there has to be like some trust that if you are not in the room, they are saying interesting things about your work and they're saying correct things about your work and representing it well in that way. And, you know, Magda and Tamash, are just some of the smartest, most interesting people out there. They're European, so they have this other sort of longer arm of art history that they refer to. Although hilariously Magda learned about art history from Russian books in Poland and nothing was in color. And so she always says that's why she kind of like never really like was that into painting 'cause it was just like, another grayscale image. Pappal's like, hello. - Yeah, exactly.
Kevin McCoy | 35:54
Welcome to my world. -.
Jenn McCoy | 35:58
So I thought that was amazing. And I really, you know, I don't know, the four of us just got on like gangbusters and had a really excellent collaboration. And, you know, they're still alive. They just closed their gallery and moved back to Europe. And so we're sad. But, you know, it's funny because I always thought, should we be at this gallery for so long? And now that we're not at that gallery, I start to realize, yeah, they really, you know, offered gallery. An amazing support for the work without like money bags of money. It's not like fancy gallery that you have your own, you know, your own personal slave and at the gallery to do all your research and fund your projects. It was always very bootstrappy. But the conversation was worth, you know, was worth not having some of those bells and whistles.
Haiver | 36:46
Yeah. And you were.
Kevin McCoy | 36:47
With them for how many-- But to go back to this first opportunity, they said, do you want to do this thing that's like project space, right? And so just to be clear, what the project space was, and this is a literal description of what it was it's a poured, polished concrete floor like was popular in the era of galleries, still certainly popular. There was a two-foot square hole in the concrete floor that looked into the basement to the right of the entrance door. And that was the hole in the floor. And they said, She's Polish, which Magda's Polish, would you like to do something in the hole in the floor? And we're like, " sure." we'll make something for the hole in the floor in the basement. And this is what we did. We made a- Did that work?
Yeah, I see a complaint. We made a functional elevator. It was there. It's gone now that I don't see it. It wasn't, it was sort of played. It was still, it wasn't playing, but okay.
Jenn McCoy | 37:53
I just wanted to show a picture. I didn't want to play the sound.
Kevin McCoy | 37:57
Yeah. So that elevator like went up and down. And spoke to you, the doors opened.
Jenn McCoy | 38:03
- I could play the video. Let's see if that works. I love going freestyle now that we all know each other.
Kevin McCoy | 38:09
Yeah, we're going freestyle. I don't want to see. I don't hear any audio, but that's okay.
And so just to pat myself on the back, pat ourselves on the back, that's like knocking it out of the park for that freaking two foot hole in the concrete. It was like totally awesome. It was hilarious. And people loved it because it was just so ridiculous and funny. And it worked in this like totally stupid way. And it was such a nightmare to make. My God, we had no money. We're just like shelling out.
I mean, I don't know. It probably cost us like what, like $2,000 back in the day or something like that to make. But that's like real money. That was like money we did not have. And we're like spending it, like hiring this guy, whatever.
And then it didn't work. And we're underneath, like literally hauling it up with this cable and whatever during the opening and on.
I mean, it was just like, my fucking God. It was totally insane. But it worked enough. And it just completely captivated the imagination of people because it was just really funny. And it opened up and it had these, it spoke the little phrases and the phrases were straight, were taken straight. And this was not a secret. We like said this, you know, the novel Valis by Philip K. Dick about this guy who, you know, kind of having this sort of religious experience. There's an appendix to that book at the end where there's this sort of like neoplatonist of statements about, you know, kind of the nature of mind and reality. And so our elevator, spoke pre-recorded passages from that text.
So it was this kind of voice in the sky. And we got that idea from that World Trade Center residency where there was this whole unified sound system from the subterranean, you know, subway entrance across the lobby to these like giant elevator banks and there'd be the same Muzak playing the whole time in these like corporate elevators. And so we just were kind of tripping on this idea of the elevator as some sort of transcendental spiritual space.
And then, you know, thought to make that into a miniature elevator. And that was really fun and it worked. And that led to this profile in Art Forum magazine, this thing called openings, a section they did, this really smart critic. Talked about our work and we got the Woody Allen response and he liked the early funny work more.
Anyway, so it's just like, you know, these things, you know, you get an opportunity. You commit to your practice, you do your thing as an end in itself, you put yourself out there. When an opportunity comes, you just maximize it in the sense, not in some kind of gross networking sense, but in just like, I'm going to just put the best thinking that I can into this opportunity. And I'm not going to hold back at a practical or creative or intellectual level. I'm going to just max it out. I'm going to just do so that I can say, I did everything I could. I can think of something to do that, you know, you have to do it.
You know, you have to do everything you can. And so you do Yeah.
Jenn McCoy | 41:34
That. What's the 47-foot cardboard table?
Kevin McCoy | 41:40
I.
Jenn McCoy | 41:40
Mean, you know, like, and I think in part of parcel of that is, you know, show up for people who are interested, you know, like I, it's so much better to fill your career, working with people who are delightful and supportive than to chase ones who have terrible reputations or who barely give you the time of day. Like there's not, there's, It's just, it's art, right?
So there's not, like, if you have a grumpy brain surgeon and you're like, well, he solves all the brains. I need to work with that guy. That's very different than an art practice where, you know, this is about culture and about conversation and collaboration. And I just, like, don't spend any time on people who, you know, clearly have another place to go. There's too many people who support the work that you could just do things with that could take up your time.
So I attention is really important.
Kevin McCoy | 42:40
Think your Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, if you know, it's like you're thinking you're, you know, it's like your goal is to make money or to, you know, to kind of like succeed in some kind of way. There's other ways to do it that are just way easier than this.
So it's like, this really has to be about the joy and the pleasure and the pain of art of making and sharing art. You know, that is the goal. That is what it is, you know? And the beauty of that is you are totally in control of that process. You can just do it, you know? And, you know, and it's its own nightmare and its own reward, you know, so it's like you can just keep doing it. And so, you know, when I say like kind of max out these opportunities, it's not that as a kind of like career strategy for success is it's just like this is how to maximize what it is that I am actually doing, which is making and producing art.
So that's it. Don't hold back. Just do it.
Yeah. You know, it just sounds some sort of like some kind of like weird new age self-help trip, but you know, it's like, Fair enough, whatever.
Jenn McCoy | 43:44
Well, practically speaking, it means you have like good pictures of, you know, even if the venue was not exactly what you wanted or it was a two foot hole in the floor, you know, like in that documentation I showed, you don't see that was like the lobby of the gallery. It just looks great.
You know, so you have then documentation of the work as close as you can to what was in your head. And I think that's, you know, that that's worth having if you're interested in showing in physical space.
Haiver | 44:14
Do you have any other advice about practically how to go about documentation, especially with the weird stuff that we're making that has many different moving components to how it functions? Yeah. It might not work in the.
Kevin McCoy | 44:26
Future. Absolutely. And the production of the documentation is its own work. The documentation is its own project. And trying to narrativize it, trying to make this kind of little mini documentary, have a kind of like educational, almost logic to it, informational logic to it. That's all absolutely true. And which is I mean, which is fine, but it is sort of, Over time, it can kind of ruin out the art, the life of it to a certain extent, but it's I don't know how you get away from that. You've got to kind of do this documentation.
You know, the strategies that, the forms that takes change over time. You know, I mean, it was in the, you know, pre-digital era, there was ways that everyone, there was the ways that you did it.
And then the kind of video era, there was ways that you did it. And obviously now in the kind of post-social version, there's different ways that you do it.
So the documentation is pretty critical.
Haiver | 45:38
Yeah. I mean, and you're talking about things that are more than, when we say documentation, you're talking about more than just, I took photos at the show, or I annotated how to install this next time and made a diagram. For people who are working across many different disciplines, can you just describe some of the things you're including under the term, the umbrella of documentation?
Yeah.
Kevin McCoy | 45:57
I mean, you're writing a kind of synopsis of it, because that's going to go on a website. You're writing a, you know, kind of a longer description of what it is that's like, might be about a kind of grant or exhibition proposal kind of thing. You know, different forms of media. And again, all this stuff is vastly easier now because the phone can do all of it, you know, from stills to video and, and whatever, you know, but, It just, the surface area, I mean, it just keeps expanding in terms of like what people want, you know, and like, well, do you have a 3D walkthrough?
You know, so people still, you know, it's just kind of ridiculous. So you just kind of... Do the best you can and try to keep organized and have some sort of system of and folders and whatever, you know, to kind of document this stuff and, you know, but treat it seriously.
Haiver | 46:59
Yeah. I mean, so for older media installations, what would you include with the sale? In relation to ownership, in relation to being able to properly display the work or preserve the work.
Jenn McCoy | 47:13
Yeah, like we, you know, like that Whitney sale that was recent. It was a whole collector's package.
So it had... This Yeah, it had earlier versions of the code it had the current code.
Haiver | 47:22
Was horror chase?
Jenn McCoy | 47:30
It had the, you know, it had installation shots from several different exhibitions of like optimum exhibition, lighting and space. It had a diagram and, you know, it's pie in the sky, like obviously like, our room isn't that big, but you know, you do what you can.
So it had, you know, like optimum, like floor plan for how that would lay out. And then I think it might've had specs for some of the electronic components included in case like down the line replacements needed to happen. A video of what like the optimum output would look like in case there was questions about is the software running correctly or a B channel in case they wanted to be like quick put on a video it broke you know like some sort of stop I can't think of anything else what else Kevin.
Kevin McCoy | 48:31
That was kind of it. I mean, that piece is embedded in its own sculptural execution environment, right? And so that's obviously the critical component of the piece.
Yeah. The actual art thing.
Haiver | 48:46
I've heard this referred to as like a stewardship packet. Like it's like something to make sure that as the tech team and the curatorial team turns over at a museum that they know how to display it to know, like you said, is it showing the video the way it was intended to be shown? Do we even know what right means in this context?
Jenn McCoy | 49:08
And there's often an artist questionnaire and, you know, big collectors and museums will all have versions of this, you know, like, I could imagine like with Dan Flavin, it's like, if it's in a different light bulb, is it still the art? And he would say yes or no. And, you know, like for us with like the database piece, it's like, well, what is the core of it? What's your intention? And those more general questions are meant to be.
You know, to guide those kinds of choices that, you know, would happen after you're not around anymore to sort of guide the installation and display of the work to. And it's interesting because I was talking to a video producer conservator at the de Menil, the Menil Foundation in Houston. And she was so great. She was just like, Artists, I don't even care what they say sometimes. And I was like, what? And her point was not so flip. It was more like, well, artists are always going to say this like, you know, version of things that they think the institution wants to hear. But then you see in their catalog, there's several different exhibitions of the work that didn't have those strictures because the reality is they want their work to be displayed as well as possible. But, The real world has lighting conditions and audio problems and, you know, shipping problems and space constraints and all sorts of things.
So they kind of have to triangulate, you know, what they can do with the, you know, the longevity and preservation of the work. You know, so often you see things that, you know, not our work, but things that were meant to be touched that now no longer can be touched. And that's just part of it, you know, as the work moves through time.
So I don't know. I mean, I'm always sort of happy.
Like, I'm very happy these days that I found that there's actual like academic programs that do media art conservation and actual people who were thinking about this because when we started that wasn't the case. So like I love that there's like you know people like Regina at the Museum of the Moving Image and you know people like this woman at the Menil Foundation who are just like vast repositories of knowledge of like a huge range of media art. It's incredible.
Kevin McCoy | 51:30
I mean, at the same time, you can't drive yourself too crazy about it. You know, it's like these, you know, it's like, who knows what's going to happen in the future? All, you know, it's like, you know, it's a blessing to have these issues arrive, you know, in any case, you know, I mean, somebody is, you know, caring and wanting to engage with your stuff, you know, some point in time, there's a lot of professionals out there. They're all getting paid, you know, to do it, you know?
So it's just like, let them solve some problems, you know, don't feel like you need to kind of have every kind of angle absolutely covered because you can't and you won't. And that can just become its own kind of excuse to keep you away from, you know, from making work.
You know, it's like, there's a million reasons to not be making your work. You know, a really good sounding reason for why you're not actually making your work is, I'm managing my archive to professionalize it.
You know, it's like, sure, but why don't you just make some new work? Right.
So do your best, you know. Do the best you can. Keep yourself somewhat organized and just... Get.
Haiver | 52:30
Back to work. Yeah, keep moving forward.
Yeah, I mean, I would think for some of the artists in the audience who are listening to this conversation, that this sounds very intimidating. They're already struggling to carve out time to work in the studio. But a lot of what goes into this documentation is the culmination of years of talking about the work, thinking about the work. And the things that were involved in other exhibitions before it finally got to the museum acquisition stage.
So I'm curious, As you look like, We looked at a bunch of work from 20 years ago, 25 years ago, at the beginning of our presentation a few weeks ago. How have you felt in your own flow as an artist, the way you talk about your work change over that time?
Kevin McCoy | 53:20
Yeah, the way you talk about it changing over time. Yeah, that's interesting. It's funny because when I look back on it too, you realize that it's just like, it's all the same. We really only did have one or two ideas. It kept getting these different forms and whatever, but it's just like, I don't know, weird, just kind of weird A plus B, you know, mirror, hall of mirror game that's going on, you know, all the time. And, And so, It's... Thank you. I think I said this at the time, the kind of like noble lie of the slide lecture where it's just like you make it all sound so inevitable and organized when in truth it's all just kind of chaos and you know, fear and ignorance. And so the So in that time, you know, we've had an opportunity to do a lot of slide talks, you know, a lot of artist talks. And you definitely try out different narratives, different kind of framings. But the work is the work. It's like I can't conjure up some brand new body at work. This is what I got. This is what I do. Here it is.
So it's both changing and not changing. That sounds kind of dumb to say, but that is true. Sure. And I mean, it's funny. Can you really turn the page on something?
You know, it's just like, would I never talk about NFTs again? Maybe, you know, I might want to someday or whatever, but it sort of seems odd.
You know, kind of that's probably not going to happen. Are we going to keep talking about that database cinema ideas?
You know, probably. I mean, they're good ideas. It was fun. It was cool, you know. But again, it's just like trying to remember that it's all... Present tense, you know, and, you know, not getting kind of locked into the past, and into your own, you know, kind of pre-digested narratives, is the, you know, is the main task. It's the number one challenge. I don't know. What do you think, Jenny?
Jenn McCoy | 55:31
Well, I mean, I will say that I feel that our work even along the way, like from cinema and video through net art, through, you know, generative projects through today, was always pretty skeptical of the sort of breathlessness of the new. And so it kind of insulated itself.
Like, I don't feel like we used to, you know, be super utopian about things that now I think are evil and horrible. Like, I think we were always really more the changes that these technologies have been foisting on culture and making art using those languages and responding to it in kind. And so, And so I think we've been able to be fairly consistent in our approach of like, you know, here are, there's like an abject quality of the world that I feel is reflected in some of the humor in our projects that is kind of future proof in a sort of weirdly cynical negative way that I think still is kind of fine. I do, You know, and that can be hard because I think younger people are earnest about things in a way that I maybe I just skipped that. But then you're like, well, you know, I don't want to. Be a downer, but these things are at play, you know.
So anyway, I don't know. So I think, you know, it could, it's harder to, it's harder and harder to discuss things that are technological, that were technologically new at the time without, you know, kind of having to do this horribly long preface of like, well, you would need to know that at this point, this was not in Common practice, you know, like the database stuff, like, you know, obviously there's so much super cuts and stuff like that on YouTube now that it's and now I could just find those shots.
So it's barely even worth talking about the process. So I feel like, you know, the stronger gambit is to stick to the conceptual development of the work and the technology was just amazing. Kind of incidental as a tool. And I think that's a stronger approach to keeping the conversation solid.-
Haiver | 57:59
I'm curious what advice you guys have for artists who are working with technology. And, I find in my own practice teaching and as a curator that artists like we love to get obsessed with the new tool or something and kind of shake it loose. We've talked a bit in our conversations, the three of us about vibe coding recently, which is obviously a hot new topic. But I'm curious what advice you give to students who are struggling with that conceptual part, like which is a, as you said, a kind of future proofing, being able to continue talking about the work in the decades to come is fascinating. Again, I think we have a lot of opinions about how we'll feel about AI five or ten years from now. Maybe not what it's doing and its specificity, but it's a complicated thing and it will color the way you talk about any work that touches it forever, undoubtedly. But I'm curious how you help students infuse conceptual or ideas or to get to the idea of when they're working with tools that can sometimes get in the way of getting to those questions.
Jenn McCoy | 59:09
Well, I don't know. I think one thing that is useful to... Keep articulating is, I mean, this is like art school 101, but I have to say it works is like, really, what is your personal relationship to this project?
You know, if it's an illustration of a new piece of technology, there's got to be somebody else who can do that. Like what is your interest in this? Where does it come from? And if you can articulate that in the work, it's just going to be stronger and more connected to you and more connected to your future trajectory. It'll feel less like an experiment or a one-off or an illustration or any number of things that, you know, could be good to do, but may not end up like having a lot of the intellectual heft that I think, you know, we're all looking for in our work.
So I think a personal connection is still like a really useful way to sort of talk about, you know, this. And it's like, People love to look at work that they can see the connection from the artist to the work.
You know, look at Yayoi Kusama with those like dots. It's like my God, this woman was obsessed with this, you know, had this whole idea about the world that she kept trying and trying to communicate and articulate from 1950 to 1997, like incredible, you know? And so that kind of obsession is one thing that you can look to for a personal connection.
So it doesn't have to be, it can be very intuitive and visceral, but there still has to be that personal idea of why you're interested in this and what it could possibly mean And then, you know, I think like some kind of storytelling can be part of that, you know, whether it's in the work or it frames the work. You know, I think that letting people in on that is a really good way to make the work happen.
I mean, for me, I like it to be obvious in the work, but, you know, it doesn't necessarily always show up in that way to, you know, at first glance, it can be a deeper, you know, a deeper connection. Yeah.
Haiver | 01:01:28
Yeah. Go ahead. After you.
Kevin McCoy | 01:01:33
Yeah, I mean, I think that you know, the, I just kind of got, after like, I was away from Twitter for six, nine months, something like that. And I just recently came back on. And of course now I'm just like, you know, on it way too much, you know?
So it's, and it's, that's my own personal failings, but it's just so funny to kind of see that world. And so I guess what I'm talking about is like being very online, you know, the very, the being very online people. And, you know, it's such this, you know, it's just such a trap, you know, it's such bullshit.
You know, it's like, I'm on the, I'm finding out the cutting edge of what's happening. I'm on the pulse of the reality and yada, you know, and now we're dealing with this, you know, kind of AI. Inflection point and this whole insanity and so there's like every day there's some new kind of crazy kind of thing Hollywood is cut because of the sea dance too and Jan Tix the agents are running wild and my god I gotta get my open claw and everything you know and it's like okay that's all well and good everything but it's just like not Is that your reality? What is your reality? What is it that you want to do? What is it that you are doing?
You know, where are you? How are you living? How are you living your life?
You know, what is actually happening today with you? You know, maybe the answer is like, this is me. This is what I am doing, you know? And it's like, okay.
You know, that's not such a novel position because most people are. That's kind of the default for most people.
So it's hard to really... Make an innovative insight about that reality, you know, but maybe it's possible.
And then you should do that. Like, if that is your reality, then try to make a piece about that fact, you know, not like what you're seeing on the screen, like, But like the fact that this is your reality, you know, so it's like, okay, how do you make that piece?
You know, and if that's not your reality, then something else is, right? So it's like, what is that?
You know, it's like, go outside. You know, walk around your neighborhood, what do you see there?
Like specifically, you know, like actually in minute detail, paying as close attention as you possibly can to like the dog shit or the trash or somebody fixing their car or, Whatever the fuck. You know, it's like, pay attention to those things. How do you tell the story of those things? How do you find some detail in that has some sort of visual appeal? It's like by being an artist, you are playing the game of sensations. You're dealing with sensations. The scientists are creating functions, the philosophers are creating concepts, and the artists are creating sensations.
So what sensorial aggregate are you bringing in response to this thing that you are seeing? Now, just focus on that and you got to pay attention to that and do it. And that can be a very online thing. That could be a purely digital thing. Sure. A hundred percent. But even then it's like, it's still about this sort of sensation, based encounter that you are framing and showing to people. And so you know, that has very little to do with what AI model is dropping today and whether Hollywood is cooked or not because of you know, the new AI model or how do you configure your agent swarm or whatever the fuck. It has very little to do with that. Put the fucking phone down.
Yeah. I mean, you basically, I.
Haiver | 01:05:24
Yeah. Your examples are.
Jenn McCoy | 01:05:26
Mean, I do think if you are mostly interested in technology, like, you know, the drone armies are swarming Ukraine and, you know, like there are things happening with these technologies that are very easy to become passionate about. And so I think you know, this might be the moment to like really work that out in a sort of model building speculative future, you know, wherever you see the, you know, the world going, like paint us that picture, like show us what it can be.
Yeah.
Haiver | 01:06:04
Right. To not be focused so much on the tool and what the tool can do in your own hands, but how are people using it in society and culture, sociopolitically and... We got a couple of questions from students to go back to your own studio practice that related to scoping and financing that I thought were really interesting. Good questions.
Like works like every shot, every episode, right? They require these extensive systems to be built. Like what does it mean?
Like the project you're working on right now and showed last week, really focused on like this multi step process from the digital into the casting and, which will eventually bring back in screens and frames as well. But those are custom, What have you learned about scoping or staffing or budgeting that still guides you or might be applicable to how the students are thinking about how to approach this themselves as they try not to bite off more than they can chew.
Kevin McCoy | 01:07:11
Amen. I mean, The... I have this weird ability, like a musician might have, you're familiar with the idea of a musician maybe having perfect pitch where they can hear and reproduce these exact tones of a scale. The kind of analog that I have for that is this snapshot ability to envision a production chain. That's like, that's going to be A, B, C, D, E, F, G.
Like a blah, to do that thing. And so... I think that we have this...
So we bring a kind of schematic view to the way we think about projects. And then part of that comes from Jen's film background or kind of film production approach where there's a sort of methodology of production and segmentation, breaking things down and whatever.
So we have this kind of like breakdown, formal schematic logic that both of us feel pretty comfortable in. And so we can map out what it's going to take to make something and then know what you know, what's going to be involved. And oftentimes, we're going to do the work because we, you know, for better or worse, don't do a massive amount of outsourcing.
So it's just like, okay, we're going to do these things. Or if we can see like there's some big kind of specific lift, we'll know that, okay, we got to find this person or that person. To do that, you know? And so, you know, so it becomes kind of project manager-y, you know? It's like our, you know, it's like maybe some of you folks have day jobs or experience in project management. It's not so different than that. Or you have friends that are project managers in various guises, you know?
So that definitely comes into play. And then if you are working from a, it's pretty straightforward, right? Say you have an opportunity, right? Okay, so that means there is a date, there's a spot on the calendar, and you have an image in your mind of what you would like to exist in the world at that time, right?
So you've got like a production picture, and you've got a date and time, right? And so you're just then like backing it up, backfilling that out to kind of say, okay, here's what needs to happen at that time. And this is the timeframe, the time windows for each of those stages. And you just map it out. And that affects you know, kind of costs or whatever.
And then you have to decide, and this is another big kind of interesting hack that I think artists bring to it, especially in the technology context versus a, say, commercial context. And you fake it. Does it need to actually function or does it need to present the semblance of function because the functionality, the experience of the functionality is the story?
You know what I mean? So it's like we need to actually close. Absolutely.
Yeah. I mean, the elevator had some functionality, but it was sort of, you know, the bare minimum functionality, you know, and it might have been with ropes and stuff, you know, in the basement at times and pushing the thing up or whatever, you know, manually triggering the steps on the computer in the basement to kind of like, okay, cue the doors, you know, which is how live theater works.
Haiver | 01:10:34
Did you get to enjoy that opening?
Kevin McCoy | 01:10:36
My god, it's the most stressful thing of a fucking life. No, you never enjoy the opening. It's because you're like managing the... Show have an opening that I'm not like literally crawling on the floor fixing something.
Haiver | 01:10:47
To.
Right. You don't get to just hang things on walls and call it a day, unfortunately.
Kevin McCoy | 01:11:01
Yeah. No, not too often. I think.
Jenn McCoy | 01:11:04
Pricing is interesting to talk about too, though. I think that... What I've learned is If something is kind of I don't know.
Well, two things. One is about grants.
Like, I feel like grants... Like, A lot of the common knowledge would be like write a grant, see if you get the money and then do the project. But I think the, stronger process is As you're doing the project, write the grant. By the time you find out that you got or did not get the grant, the project is finished.
So even if you don't get the grant, you have a finished project you've paid for. If you do get the grant, you then pay yourself back or build the next project with that money.
You know what I mean? Like you can always be in a cycle kind of behind money coming in the door.
And then, you know, you can kind of win-win. And it means you're not like, waiting around for money like that's what's always so shocking to me about the film world is someone's got a screenplay that's getting made and they wrote it like 10 years ago like what possible connection to reality is still there in this story that maybe hasn't been done by 20 films in the interim like it's surprising to me that films are ever good with that timeline you know so I think you gotta you know kind of like do it on a level that you can afford so that the money could be just to make a better version or to work on something completely different if you feel like you've exhausted the idea already. And I think additioning can be part of that.
Like it's, If you're going to throw all of your effort into something, don't think that it's done just because you've done it once, you know, and that was the biggest thing coming to Postmasters that we learned is, you know, we do all this work and be like, okay, for our next show, we want to do this totally different thing. And, you know, Postmasters was like, whoa, just because you've thought it through and you feel done with it. Not everybody has caught on yet.
You know, like we don't, we haven't sold that many of these or we haven't sold, you know, we have more people that could be approached about this body of work. Can you make a body of work that's sort of the same, but a little bit different, you know, like we would have stopped making those database pieces after the first one, but the gallery was like, can you make them more beautiful? Can you make them more solid? Or is there other content that makes sense? And all of a sudden we were like, yeah, let's keep going. And it was such...
Like such a good tip, you know, like, had we like just changed, you know, we barely have a style as it is, had we just like completely changed, you know, it would have been death. So, you know, slow down, you know, like give the art a bunch of different, you know, Give people a bunch of bites at the apple to get the idea out there because the artwork is just a carrier for your ideas and you can make a bunch of different projects much more cheaply in the same form factor that you can reinvent projects every time.
Right? Does that make sense.
Haiver | 01:14:23
Kevin? Yeah, I really appreciate that continued to feel authentic to you as artists as well, that this simply wasn't, my gallery wants me to make more so they have more to sell. Making other containers for the same idea or type of idea or to see an evolution over time is really empowering to realize viewers need that time, especially the stranger and more outside of their everyday experience of what art is or can be, which is, I think, especially true here. Do you have any advice about applying for grants? And one question that came through was, is it possible to fund the research phase of a project and not just the final production phase? Which I feel like you answered that by just saying, just apply and make the work whether the money's there or not, and it will shake out at some point.
Jenn McCoy | 01:15:16
Yeah, I mean, sometimes you have to kind of make it up like, I think I'm going to do this with it, even though your research could go in a totally different way. But the good news is most grantors don't.
Like, we literally have never had a grantor come back and be like, you know, you said that you were going to make this, but actually you made this other thing. Like, no one ever goes back.
Like, their main goal is to just give away the money and give it to people who seem qualified. And you might have to, like, for, I think, NISCA, you have to write, like, a final report. But, you know... As long as you can show that the money was spent, you know, more or less on a project or justify, you know, how your research went and how it changed paths. I think that's totally valid. And, you know, I don't I'd have never met a granting organization that was weird about that. The other thing I think is amazing that I did not know is I thought that. That if one organization funded you, that they would be like jealously guarding your, you know, your name and your IP. Whereas it's much more likely that they just want the project to have more reach. And so if you're lucky to have two organizations that are in competition, just get those people together in a room.
Like we had an amazing situation where we had an exhibition opportunity at one place and the grant organization helped fund the catalog for the museum, even though it was different locations. A different organization.
So sometimes those collaborations between institutions can be really great. Like we got into the Sundance Film Festival once for to show a project and I know this sounds insane, but they did not have a video projector to show the work on. And so we called back the Creative Capital who had funded the project and they're like, yeah, we'll buy you one and send it over there.
So I don't know. It's, It's to these especially like non-commercial spaces, they really kind of just want to help. And so to put them in dialogue and not keep them siloed. I think can be strong.
Like, you know, if you have one project and no time to make two, like maybe call up the other person and be like, Hey, I'm already working on this, but it would have more reach and I could make more of them or show it different places. If you guys supported that, that kind of research along with this other organization, they can just say no, but it's not going to be a big black mark, against you.
Haiver | 01:18:00
Yeah, really getting people to dream together and to realize that they can build on each other's work and the funding that they've put in place is... I think really empowering for artists in a lot of ways. Yep. I'm curious as we come to our close here, like, What does success mean for you guys as artists now versus say 15, 20 years ago?
Kevin McCoy | 01:18:28
- Well, I realized, a while ago. You know, I, Yeah, I just became really interested in artists that had been doing it for a long time.
You know? People in their 80s and whatever, you know, it was just like, you persevered. How did you persevere? And I'm not 80, I'm far from 80, but there's still a lot of years on the tally, kind of having tallied up those years. And we're still going, still doing it. And so my goal is to keep doing it. That's the goal. I want to just keep doing it. And keep finding I get it. I keep finding things I'm interested in. It's really weird, you know? The glass half full continues to persevere over the glass half empty. It's kind of crazy. I don't know why.
You know, there's every reason in the world that you could just like the glass half empty or less. But, you know, so I just want that to keep going, you know, and I want to finally make, it's like, you know, it's like, I want it all to come together, man. I'm waiting for that. I can. Want it all to like. I want the earth to just be like, Yes, there it is right there. That fucking thing.
So waiting for that. It's getting there, maybe. We'll yeah.
Haiver | 01:20:02
See. I mean, the trip take is done now, so who knows?
Yeah, you've got the new thing you're cooking on, but yeah, there's time.
Kevin McCoy | 01:20:09
No, it's all kinds of crazy shit. I don't know. But yeah, keep them going. Keep them going. Keep them keeping hope alive.-
Yeah. That's my.
Jenn McCoy | 01:20:20
Goal. That's good. That sums it up pretty much.
Yeah. I am very curious as to see, you know, so many things are changing so rapidly, you know, the collapsing of, you know, high art versus low art, whatever that used to mean. And, You know, the blurring of categories between digital and physical, you know, taxonomies for work. Yeah, I mean, a lot of it is the same, but a lot of it feels new and unexpected. And yeah, I don't know. I'm more... Optimistic about my own capacity to keep like working on things than I am about the, you know, However, that fits into, you know, the sort of exhibition circuit and what that, you know, there's so many changes happening there that I, yeah, I can't even predict. But, I think that's enough. I feel like, you know, it's been, it's good to, you know, have sort of run through some interests from early days and sort of been able to generate new kinds of curiosity lately.
So I think that's kind of the goal. Just, you know, try to keep being curious about things.
Haiver | 01:21:39
Yeah, my favorite people usually are. Well, it's nice to end on some hope. I know when we read the headlines about the art world, it can seem like a lot of doom and gloom. And yeah, there are certainly exciting things happening. Thank you so much for being here with us for this like five week stint and dipping in and out of. Artists Commons program and I know the students have learned a lot from both just how to look at art in those early weeks. The responses in the chat, I don't know how much you saw to the process of last week was just enthusiastic and inspired. And so we really learned so much.
So thank you for doing this and being our first guinea pigs through this process. It's.
Jenn McCoy | 01:22:23
Been a pleasure. I can't wait to hear about the trajectory of the program and to meet you all in person hopefully someday.
Haiver | 01:22:31
Yeah, we had Exactly.
Kevin McCoy | 01:22:32
The first Artist Commons IRL meetup.
Haiver | 01:22:35
We have some quarterly meetups planned coming up. And as we onboard more students this summer and grow in size, we'll have more meetups and more cities happening, which I'm really excited about.
So thank you again. Super Have a good one, guys.
Jenn McCoy | 01:22:47
Cool. Thanks, everyone.
Kevin McCoy | 01:22:48
Okay.
Haiver | 01:22:53
Okay, that brings us to the end of our first five-week cycle as a program. I'm super excited by everything people are starting to see, connections between the different lectures and visiting artists and the philosophy of art and art history lectures and our first conversation earlier this week about art. The business side of art and what it means to curate and collect. We have more of those planned in the coming weeks. As we kick into the second half of our first quarter, we're about to start with our next visiting artist in residence. That's Mitchell F. Chan. He is coming in from, he is dialing in from Canada. He's an artist who works with both conceptual art and then visual spans that out across both installation art as well as video game based art and interactive art systems.
So like we do every time with our new visiting artists, we start on Sunday with our close looking discussion day. So we're going to interact with a couple pieces of Mitchell's You're going to have to come and play video games, which I think is very fun. One of them is a video game that then turns into not a video game, which I don't want to spoil anything about that experience, but we should have a good time. We'll sit down, play the game for about 15-20 minutes, then pop into a discussion for 15-20 minutes and do that twice.
So that's the plan for Sunday, and then next week... We have a lecture on Tuesday and then Mitchell will come in on Thursday to give his visiting artist presentation and give us an overview. Of his body of work. There's a bunch of things in there that are on his website that if you're hungry and curious now, you can go poke around in and take a look at. He's done so much more than I think even people who are familiar with his work know. He has a whole studio practice and fabrication thing.
So I'm excited for us to explore those together. So as always, thanks for being here. I'm super excited to continue our cohort sessions next week and dive into the workshop phase. For anyone who I've had a couple questions about where to post and share work in progress, and I've given a couple different answers to the different cohorts.
So I just want to unify one thing, which is next week I'm going to record a separate standalone little portion to explain how and when and where to share work in progress, and that is the moment I'm going to open up the work in progress channels in each of the cohorts for sharing work for this first week. Just go ahead and share it in the main chat channel those artists that are sharing remember to share your work 24 to 48 hours before your session with no accompanying text or explanation just here is the work that we will be looking at for the feedback session on x day and we'll take it from there all right y'all thanks again for being such an attentive and supportive audience and thanks for all your great questions for the mccoy's it I think you saw how the questions you asked got weaved in very quickly throughout. It was a really fun conversation to put together. All right, we'll see you in a few days. Take care.